inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #0 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (https://plutopia.io) (jonl) Wed 29 Dec 21 16:45

    
Welcome to the State of the World 2022, a survey of confusion,
political chaos, societal disruption, climate instability. And the
hopeful stuff: innovation, humor, transcendance, ice cream... we
have two weeks for asynchronous conversation, and a lot of ground to
cover.

Thinking back to Viridian Design - and acknowledging that there's
something often referred to as the "intellectual dark web" - let's
say this conversation could be the genesis of an "intellectual shiny
web." Some people want to go down fighting, we want to go down
thinking - and joking.

Four of us are formally comitted to this two-week verbal jam, and
others will chime in, including members of the WELL, aka Whole Earth
'Lectronic Link, probably the oldest sustained online community
still functioning. If you're not a member of the WELL, you can't
post a question or comment directly, but you can email to inkwell at
well.com, and we'll post it for you.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #1 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (https://plutopia.io) (jonl) Wed 29 Dec 21 16:45

    
Introductions of the principal players:

Bruce Sterling is a science/speculative fiction author, journalist,
thinker, speaker, and heyoka born in America, raised globally,
currently residing in Europe.

Jon Lebkowsky (yours truly) is a sometimes writer, pod emcee,
instigator, enzyme, and attempted Buddhist living somewhere in his
mind.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #2 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (https://plutopia.io) (jonl) Wed 29 Dec 21 16:47

    
Our very special guests deserve longer introductions:

Vinay Gupta is a Scottish-Indian technology entrepreneur. Vinay was
the release coordinator for the 2015 launch of the Ethereum
blockchain and wrote
<https://medium.com/humanizing-the-singularity/by-the-end-of-this-article-youre
-going-to-understand-blockchains-in-general-and-ethereum-a-next-e11df6a1d7cf and lectured https://vimeo.com/161183966> extensively on the technology in the early years. As CEO of Mattereum, he is putting the blockchain to work nailing down uncertainties about physical goods, both provenance questions (like "is this painting genuine?") but also social and environmental concerns https://mattereum.com/circular-economy/ (such as "can you prove to me this electric bike does not contain cobalt from slave labour mining?"). His book, The Future of Stuff, <https://www.amazon.com/Future-Stuff-Vinay-Gupta-ebook/dp/B08B4F5QK3/ref=sr_1_1
?keywords=the+future+of+stuff&link_code=qs&qid=1640174742&sr=8-1> makes a moral case for object transparency as a critical platform for global change.

Prior to this Vinay did 12 years in the defense, security and
resilience arena working on critical infrastructure, failed states,
and long range planning for rehousing hundreds of millions of
climate refugees. His Open Hardware refugee shelter design, the
hexayurt <http://myhopeforthe.world>, has become a standard fixture
at Burning Man with thousands of people building their own home.

---     

Emily J Gertz is a contributing editor at The Conversation
<https://theconversation.com/us> and DeSmog
<https://www.desmog.com/>.  In 2020 she was the senior editor of
Drilled News <https://drillednews.com/>, a spinoff of the Drilled
podcast. Emily has reported on diverse climate and environment
topics for publications including HuffPost, Sierra, Popular Science,
Scientific American, Reveal and The Revelator.  She is co-author
with Patrick Di Justo of two DIY tech books for Make  Books:
"Environmental Monitoring with Arduino" and "Atmospheric Monitoring
with Arduino." She also contributed to "The Science Writers'
Handbook," "Worldchanging: A User's Guide for the 21st Century," and
"Wake Up and Smell the Planet."
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #3 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (https://plutopia.io) (jonl) Wed 29 Dec 21 16:47

    
I'm starting this year's State of the World with a kind of "top ten"
list of things that have been happening...

1. Joe Biden became President of the USA despite an attempted coup. 

By election day 2020, the US was already considered a "backsliding
democracy," according to a 2017 report by the European think tank
International IDEA.
<https://www.idea.int/publications/catalogue/global-state-democracy-exploring-d
emocracys-resilience> 

Here's their explanation:

"In our analysis of the United States (one of seven backsliding
countries in 2020: Brazil, Hungary, India, the Philippines, Poland,
and Slovenia), we show that while the country performs very well
across many indicators of democracy, there are significant and
serious declines in these vital parts of the democratic system, and
there is reason to be worried about the trajectory of the country.
By analogy, it’s a bit like someone who appears to be very
physically fit, but has very high cholesterol. An individual is
healthy in many ways, but s(he) is at high risk of a serious medical
incident. 

"One of the most notable trends in the United States in the last
five years has been a decline in what we call Effective Parliament.
The inability of the US Congress to check the executive or
investigate the actions of former-President Trump – even after the
change in the majority party after the 2018 midterms – is reflected
in a sharp decline in this indicator in 2017 and following. At the
same time, police brutality in response to protests (particularly
those organized by the Black Lives Matter movement) led to a rapid
decline in the Freedom of Association and Assembly."
<https://www.idea.int/blog/democratic-backsliding-different-causes-divergent-tr
ajectories>

Since 2017, things only got worse for democracy in the USA. Then 
Biden was elected - and his opponent tried his best to undo the
election and install himself as President. And part of that
attempted undoing was a violent insurrection. No need to belabor the
point - if you're reading this, you already know the story.
Democracy in the USA at that point was gasping for air, and
breathing only a CO2/methane mix from GOP emissions.

2. It's not just the USA - globally, democracies have started to
bite the proverbial dust. India changed from "free" to "partly
free," based on a report from Freedom House
<https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2021/democracy-under-siege>.  Bolsonaro attacked the legitimacy of his country’s elections, prompting talk that “democracy is dying in Brazil.” Democracies in Myanmar, Chad, Mali, Guinea, and Sudan all were ousted in coups. Alexei Navalny was imprisoned in Russia. The USA hosted a Democracy summit, but it hasn't seemed to have much effect. A global trend. The USA tried to respond with a "Summit for Democracy" https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/23/summit
-for-democracy-summary-of-proceedings/ - but maybe a summit isn't what's needed. Maybe we need a war room.

3. In Afghanistan, the Taliban returned to power as the US removed
its troops. The US withdrawal was messy and disturbing, worse than
expected because the Afghanistan government collapsed more quickly
than expected, and many of the US-trained Afghan troops quickly
defected. Generals testified that they had recommended leaving 2,500
troops in the country, and General Mark Milley described Biden's
withdrawal plan as a "strategic failure."

4. Climate change: “A code red for humanity.” That’s how UN
Secretary General António Guterres’ described the UN report released
in August that concluded that humanity is pretty much screwed if we
don't find a way to constrain emission of heat-trapping gases, which
continue increasing in the atmosphere. 

Meanwhile climate instability manifests everywhere. Here in Texas,
we had an anomalous freeze that nearly took down the power grid and
water systems. A weakening polar vortex blasted vicious cold into an
unprepared Texas, collapsing the state's power grid, which for
economic and political reasons stands alone, not connected to the
two major US grids. We were without electricity for hours, without
water for days - though the sky opened briefly and a light shone on
a local liquor store that was helpfully open, so we made like St.
Bernards, carting booze to our chilly family.

5. The Covid pandemic continues; Covid mutations continue spreading
and surging. Ready for the plague to end, people are dropping their
masks and getting back to business as usual - while a new mutation
brings another surge of infections. Evil politicians meanwhile
politicized public health, mounting unprecedented, aggressive,
sometimes even violent challenges to standard public health
practices like masking and vaccination. Anti-vaxxers seized the day,
campaigning to demonize the very concept of vaccination, which has
saved so many lives over the last century. It's like the average
global IQ dropped a few dozen points. On the other hand, a lot of
people have been vaccinated, and the virus seems to be adopting a
new, milder attitude. Perhaps the next mutation will be an STD, and
people will take it much more seriously...

6. Various global immigration crises, with Haiti driving the surge.
Migration from troubled third world countries to wealthier first
world countries is not new, but the number of immigrants continues
to grow - lately a large number of Haitian immigrants in particular
have been trying to cross border, driven by political instability
and natural disasters, including a cat 4 hurricane in 2020 and
magnitude 7.2 earthquake in August 2021. Quite a few immigrants have
been stacking up at the US border. Biden has been accused variously
of opening borders (which is incorrect) vs. being too strict and
sustaining Trump border policies (closer to the truth). How to
resolve? We can always build more walls and fences - at least the
immigrants will be fit from the exercise.

7. Intellectual Dark Web or Liminal Web. The latter phrase was
coined by Joe Lightfoot, the former coined by Eric Weinstein, and
more widely used. It's a pretty diverse group - not necessarily in
agreement about everything. Initially opposed to what some call
"cancel culture," they seem to have other concerns with progressives
... but they're not tyical right to far right ideologues. Some talk
about "sensemaking." Some talk about blue or red tribes or churches.
They talk about culture war. They tend to be have origins in white
middle class America. Because there's diversity of belief and focus
within this space, I hate to try to talk about it. It seems like
anything I say would be wrong from some perspective. That's a
postmodern dilemma, right there.

8. Idiots on parade: the aggressively stupid are amplified by both
social and traditional media. Rejections of public health wisdom,
science, various forms of expertise. Core argument: "You can't make
me think. You can't make me do the right thing." It feels like a
prolonged adolescent tantrum, "you're not the boss of me." Media
amplification creates a weird sense of validity. Those of us who
argued that the Internet would make people smarter, and lead to
better choices, are pretty embarrassed right now.

9. Blockchains and NFTs - Not my territory, Vinay is the expert
here. I feel skeptical, but The Guardian is bullish about
blockchain-realted movements: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2021/dec/26/blockchain-cryptocurrency-nft
-biggest-small-business-story-2021?CMP=oth_b-aplnews_d-1>

10. Privatization of space travel. "Earth is disposable, we can move
to outer space!" Maybe we'll go to Mars (where NASA made oxygen in
2021.)  This feels like a big deal, but it's hard to see exactly
where it's going. We've seen some PR-driven flights into near space,
like William Shatner's.  We're hearing that there will be more
visits to the moon, and perhaps development of other parts of the
solar system - the "The Expanse," with Mars colonized and the
asteroid belts mined for various minerals, forms of wealth. But
we're still not sure how well people can survive in space, how long
and how far. Those of us who've been reading science fiction for
decades are only surprised that we weren't privatizing space sooner,
that it took so long to get where we are. 

That's a good profile of 2021, though there's a shitload of stuff
that didn't make the list. And the question we're considering for
the next two weeks is where are we now, what's the state of the
world, and what can we expect in 2022? 

As I type these final words, I'm hearing this:
https://youtu.be/ZrnrpPuBC8I
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #4 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 30 Dec 21 20:11

    
That's a hell of a list to be starting with, Jon.

I'd like to pick up on the supply chain grind, the chip shortages,
and the fact that solar panels and batteries started to get more
expensive after a very long and seemingly unstoppable downwards
price trend.

That's all stuff which has been theorized as being very important
for many years. But it's the first time we are really seeing it as
an event of global impact and it is hair raising.

Hi, everybody! I'm glad to be here.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #5 of 420: ejgertz (emilyg) Fri 31 Dec 21 14:47

    
Hello, all.

Quite a list, Jon. Thinking on what I could add...

The state of the collective global human psyche seems to be one of
trauma, depression, anxiety or fear. Millions of people worldwide
have lost someone they loved to the pandemic, directly or
indirectly.

Even the richest countries led by reasonably competent politicians
keep making terrible public health decisions – it's like there's a
transcendent global collapse of leadership and forward thinking.

The obscene concentration of wealth continues, along with the lack
of political will to break it up.

The fossil fuel industry keeps squeaking past accountability for
doing what it did, while knowing what it knew, while also continuing
to block climate action on even a fraction of the needed scale.
(See: Sen. Joe Manchin).

Yet, here in the US belly of the capitalist beast, the mutual aid
movement continues to blossom, and millions are fed up enough with
crap pay or insane work demands to walk away from their jobs. 

Children and teens and young adults continue to turn out on streets
and in courts around the world, refusing to accept the usual climate
blah blah blah. 

The auto industry seems to be committing to the transition to
electrification within about 15 years – which seems like a firm
harbinger of carbon-fueled transportation's demise. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #6 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 1 Jan 22 08:05

    
*I'm liking the idea that I might not have to say much about the
State of the World this year, because we have stellar guests.

However, I always imagine that, and this is year twenty-one of us
doing this together.  So, let's have at it!  Year of the Tiger!

I'm currently in Ibiza with the Less Tiny Spaniard, who was born
during the pandemic.  She can walk now.  She's gonna be talking
pretty soon.  Nobody knows what potpourri of global languages  she
will speak, however.  Our multinational household has no language in
common.

So I'm again "isolated" on this island, but I'm not sensing much
worldly commitment and urgency as the calendar changes.  This year,
MMXXII, already looks and feels much like the past two years. The
year  2022 is just as wicked as 2020 and 2021, and objectively,
people ought to be just as upset about that, and maybe they are --
but they're no longer surprised.  It's not news.

The twenty-twenties are a young decade, but they've got a tenor all
their own.  
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #7 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 1 Jan 22 08:09

    

The state of the world is diseased.  If you've got a disease and you
don't get over it, then you've got a different routine: you're an
invalid.  You thought you could vault over turnstiles and run
upstairs three at a time, but that was then.  Now, it turns out
there's a lot you just can't do.  

You've got constraints.  Thankfully, you're not dead yet; there's
rather a lot you can do to beguile the empty hours, Robert Louis
Stevenson style, on your bedridden Land of Counterpane.  But you're
not a heroic Olympic athlete with high-tech superpowers.

Even if you're the most powerful and competent man in the world --
who in MMXXII would be Xi Jinping, awaiting coronation as
Emperor-for-Life of Neo-Imperial China -- you're gonna be hard put
even to throw a proper Olympics.

This situation much resembles that in 2020 and 2021, but it's more
settled-in.  Unlike in the heyday of the Washington Consensus, you
can't jump onto a jet in Flat World and zip wherever you want in 24
hours.

  People get it about the trade wars, the ethnonationalism and the
wall-building -- a lot of them even voted for that, and they want
more of it -- but the new development is that you yourself can't
move.   You've become a chrome-walker type; you've got crimps and
pangs; you ail.  
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #8 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 1 Jan 22 08:09

    

Also, the stuff you pushed a button about, and you ordered, and you
expected it delivered promptly -- it can't move, either.  The supply
chains are no longer "chains," they've become supply clouds, and
like most clouds, they're not attached to any real-life situation on
the ground.  That which should arrive, that which should happen --
it doesn't.

Packages stall.  Events are "indefinitely postponed."  Corporate
plans have "poor visibility."  The departure of ships and planes are
commonly cancelled.  Documentation is confused, legality sputters,
bureaucracies are working-from-home.   National borders require 
much finagling with QR codes, while the websites fail and there's no
one on the phone.  Also, there's no phone.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #9 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 1 Jan 22 08:12

    

I was idly drifting around Ibiza during New Years morning MMXXII;
Ibiza is a tourist island that likes to claim, "You can find a
beautiful beach and there's nobody there!"  They're kidding; what
they really mean is, you can find some tolerant beach where you can
be German, get naked and neck with your Swedish Significant Other,
and there aren't any witnesses who will fuss about that.  It's a
cultural service; there's a red-lit zone of understanding, it's
great, Europeans love that.

However, when you really ARE on a huge, beautiful beach, and it's a
tourist beach fully kitted out to provide beer and beds to
hedonistic foreigners, and there really is nobody there -- like, not
one human soul, it's Crusoe-like, it's devoid of cultural
intercourse and economic transaction -- that feels historically
impressive.  It's like strolling through the Roman Colosseum without
even one Christian devoured by a lion. 

 You know, objectively, that the Christians still exist and it's the
lion of plague that is devouring 'em, yet the Colosseum's banners
and trumpets are gone.  There's no vast popular roar of thumbs-down
from the bread-and-circuses contingent.  It's an era devoid of
pageantry.  It's busy forgetting what pageantry is.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #10 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (https://plutopia.io) (jonl) Sat 1 Jan 22 08:58

    
I'm also at the beach, on the Texas Gulf Coast, and the experience
here is quite different. The beaches are packed, RVs and tents for
miles in either direction, people sitting in the sun, body surfing,
parasailing. The small beach town we're in is overrun with tourists
from all over the U.S., including a flock of winter Texans from as
far away as Canada. Stores and restaurants are packed with mostly
unmasked folks of every age and description. Odd to see such
cavalier behavior as another pandemic surge is started; odder still
that that beaches are full and so many in the water, as though it
was midsummer - but it's New Year's Eve and New Year's Day. Crazy
weather, unseasonably warm, and warmer every year.  
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #11 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 1 Jan 22 13:50

    
I am not on a beach. Or anywhere near one. Goddamnit. :)

I guess the thing with *pan*demics is that society or the species
itself is sick. Even if you don't have the disease the entire system
we are embedded in does. Supply chains, cancelled gatherings, absent
friends (particularly the dead) - the entire fabric we are embedded
in is (relatively mildly) diseased.

This pandemic was not The Big One. It's sort of a minimum viable
pandemic, the least bad thing worthy of the name. Not over yet but
(for once) I'm seeing light at the end of the tunnel. Not generally
my style, but Omicron is spreading so fast that everybody who's
gonna get it will have gotten it by the time spring rolls around.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #12 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (https://plutopia.io) (jonl) Sat 1 Jan 22 16:35

    
Meanwhile we have a whole culture of opposition to the kind of
public health measures that could save us, when The Big One does
indeed come.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #13 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 1 Jan 22 18:35

    
It's very odd to see a virus that singles out a single demographic
and attacks them based on their political beliefs.

But that's what we have here: a virus that preys most on the people
who resist common sense public health measures.

It's a vicious, brutal, ironic situation. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #14 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 2 Jan 22 11:04

    
I've been combing the databanks for some early indicators --
commonly we do that here in State of World, "well, here's this new
cool thing which might differentiate this year from the last one" --
yet I'm coming up pretty dry.

If you search for the usual blue-sky brags from the customary
innovators, there's a lot of "Despite Covid We."  They trot out
their few and paltry advances, and they half-apologize about having
so little novelty to offer.  

  It's like when you're watching Napoleon's army frozen in mud, and
they're singing "Despite the Freezing Mud We."  Okay, Soldiers of
France: you're marching, but you're not marching out with that
footloose ease with which you marched in.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #15 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 2 Jan 22 11:07

    
Why does MMXXII feel like this?  Some of it's clearly grief, or
shell-shock, or people  being sick, but I'm thinking that I
underestimated the creative fertility of big, messy, public events. 
Just, going out to rub elbows at close quarters with a crowd of big
five or ten thousand.  Because that's not around.

People know what they oughta do and want to do, and they can
conspire about it on Discord or Zoom, but some element of
intellectual contagion has gone missing along with the quarantines. 


Even if you atttend the banal Conference of Bowling Ball
Manufacturers, you come out of it with a human herd-instinct 
conviction of, "Man, we're gonna scatter some pins!"  But the
situation as it stands is more like "bowling alone."  Plague society
suffers a famine of civic engagement.  

Even if you daringly plunge into a crowd, it's like attending some
Afghan wedding where everyone's heavily armed and loves to fire into
the air at random.   Yes, they want to celebrate, but there's gonna
be a body-count.  So I can imagine travel restrictions easing up
this year (because they're not worth much -- there's no safe place
to run to or from). But during this year, all big indoor events will
still  be spreader events.  The broader and more cosmopolitan the
crowd -- South By SouthWest Interactive, for instance -- the riskier
that gathering will be.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #16 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 2 Jan 22 11:10

    

I spent a lot of time with non-fungible tokens in 2021.  I found it
richly entertaining, it consistently cheered me up, even.  People
underestimate its appeal as a massive, raucous, semi-legal rave
scene where the participants don't have to breathe on each other. 
Even hardened crypto chisellers were crying alone in their beer
about their beloved "NFT Community," and it's pretty clear that
commiseration and solidarity were what they wanted, much more than
their beloved jpegs of bored apes.

 I don't believe that 2022 will be a stellar year for NFTs.  They
won't evaporate like a mere fad, but it'll be a consolidation year. 
NFT community promises, such as "Web3" and "metaverses," they're
consolation talk, sermons, rather than near-term technologies with
any real likelihood of being delivered. 

 "Metaverse" in particular is embarrassing; it 's like watching
Zuckerberg pulling his hoodie over his head so the mean kids won't
spit on him.  It's not any way forward; it's hype as disguise.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #17 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 2 Jan 22 15:53

    
I feel that for me what's missing is *buzz*. Here we are, building
the future, but nobody is excited about it because online excitement
doesn't feel real to me. Maybe I'm too analogue, didn't get internet
until I was maybe 19, but I just don't get emotional about Twitter.
Zoom calls leave me cold.

There's a sort of emotional damper on everything because I guess
humans vary in their ability to emotionally respond to online
socialization. And that has huge network effects: if 20% of the
emotional oomph is lost at every link as something ripples across a
graph, it's not going far.

Maybe the big conspiracy theory cultures are signal amplifying until
you can actually feel something.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #18 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (https://plutopia.io) (jonl) Mon 3 Jan 22 07:36

    
Zuckerberg promoting "the Metaverse" is like Jim Cameron promoting
3D films - which are immersive, wonderful to some, headache-inducing
to most others. Hordes of people showed up to watch Avatar in 3D,
and the Real3D process caught on for a while... but over time there
were fewer screenings. Today films are still converted to 3D, but
some theaters won't screen 'em, and others drop them into once-daily
slots at best. 3D television imploded.

A 2D metaverse might get some traction, in the way that Second Life
was immensely popular to a small group who loved the shallow visual
representation of reality, enjoyed building blocky worlds and
islands and figure out how to have virtual sex in digital bathrooms.

The Metaverse could distract us, perhaps, from climate instability
and an authoritarian political drift. Burying our heads in the
digital sand, wishing the difficulties of the world away as we
navigate a pixelated alternate reality, eating our virtual pizzas
and blowing virtual kisses to the digital wind.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #19 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 3 Jan 22 08:08

    
Ah, but since then we've had Minecraft and Roblox. An entire
generation of kids have sunk their childhoods into virtual worlds
that they interacted with via tablets and laptops and gaming pcs.
They're they people buying NFTs - they've been buying, selling and
trading virtual property since they could walk if not before.
They're ready to go.

It's easy to miss Roblox: a billion a year in revenue, sixty billion
market cap, from a programmable 3D world system that kids make games
in.

Quite some concerns around it in terms of "do these children
actually have *jobs*?" like Uber drivers.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #20 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 3 Jan 22 15:29

    
I don't think that we should underestimate the potential impact of
whatever moves Dear Leaders Zuckerberg and Sandberg decide will
maximize shareholder value. Sure, it's laughable to us longtime
internet intellectuals and chatterati to hear this word from early
1990s science fiction resurrected so ignorantly of its origins – but
actually they've gotten it all too right. 

Remember that a plot point of Snow Crash was that the bad guys were
spreading a virus via the Metaverse that would allow a psychopathic
Murdoch/Redstone type to reprogram and control the mass public.

Well, every day, more than 2.8 billion people worldwide use
Facebook* – which is one of most addictive, destabilizing and deadly
global forces of contemporary times. 
In Snow Crash .... (SPOILER) .... the bad guys lost, but Zuckerberg
and Sandberg have so far faced even less accountability for their
bad acts than the average Republican lawmaker. 




*https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/06/01/facts-about-americans-and-fac
ebook/
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #21 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Mon 3 Jan 22 15:38

    <scribbled by bslesins Mon 3 Jan 22 15:40>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #22 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Mon 3 Jan 22 15:41

    
The ability of Facebook (the company) to control the masses seems
exaggerated? The masses are unruly and don't take orders very well.

Sure, they're easy to provoke, if that's what you want to do. But
they're receptive only to certain kinds of messages. There are only
so many things you can do with a mob, and they are mostly about
tearing things down.

You would think, of all the messages Facebook might want to promote,
their own popularity would be number one, but now everyone hates
them, and the politicians go along with the crowd. This doesn't seem
like a company that's all that good at public relations?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #23 of 420: Administrivia (jonl) Mon 3 Jan 22 21:30

    
This conversation is world-readable at
<https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/516/State-of-the-World-2022-pa
ge01.html>. If you're reading, and you're not a member of the WELL, you won't be able to post directly. However if you have a comment or question, send to inkwell at well.com, and we'll make every effort to get it posted here.

And, of course, you can join the WELL: <https://www.well.com/join/> 
It's a conferencing system and a virtual community with ongoing
intelligent conversation on many subjects - a great alternative to
drive-by posting on social media.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #24 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Tue 4 Jan 22 15:58

    
Hi Brian. Thanks for joining us.

I don't think the opinions of some American politicians, public
intellectuals, tech news junkies and mainstream journalists are
indicative of how Facebook is seen and used across the globe. 

Facebook is the third most popular web site on the planet.
(Wikipedia is the fourth, while Google's search and YouTube take the
top two.) 

As the MIT Technology Review recently put it, accurately: "For huge
parts of the world, Facebook is synonymous with the internet."

The point of Facebook isn't to control the masses. The point is to
make money. The main way Facebook does that is by putting ads in
front of eyeballs. Feeding the masses dis-, mis-, and malinformation
turns out to be a great way to keep people logged into and looking
at their Facebook accounts.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #25 of 420: I was oilers1972, now going by (mct67) Tue 4 Jan 22 16:52

    
#12--and that's what worries me.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #26 of 420: I was oilers1972, now going by (mct67) Tue 4 Jan 22 16:58

    
"The Metaverse could distract us, perhaps, from climate instability
and an authoritarian political drift. Burying our heads in the
digital sand, wishing the difficulties of the world away as we
navigate a pixelated alternate reality, eating our virtual pizzas
and blowing virtual kisses to the digital wind."

Which might not be so bad, if it were only the climate instability
and authoritarian political drift that were virtual.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #27 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 4 Jan 22 18:28

    
There's a lot of different ways different societies might use VR,
and the networked versions of it which people are calling Metaverse.

In our society there are two pertinent questions:

1) what's the most profitable thing you could do with this
technology?

2) what's the morally worst thing you could do with this technology?

I'd like to hazard a guess at both.

I think the most profitable thing is to sweep the poor out of the
path of the rich. The poor at at home surfing virtually, and the
rich are out there surfing physically. Poor folks live in windowless
basements and exercise in VR. Rich folks run in the woods in
national parks.

The rich are desperate to get away from the poor, and as the wealth
divide hardens and hardens. American is heading towards a class
separation much like Brazil. The children of the billionaires don't
get an iPad until they're pretty mature. Real estate is still the
yardstick of real wealth in most rich people's minds. Landlords got,
what, 40% of the VC money spent in San Francisco?

So the push will be to virtualize the needs of the poor. TV was just
the start. Never mind social media.

Then the other question, what's the morally *worst* thing you could
do with the metaverse. The answer is pretty simple: use it to
persuade people to change the real world in damaging ways.
Consumerism is driven by a constant stream of advertising. All the
screens, all the time. Careful manipulation of surfaces so people
forget to think about where handbags are manufactured or what
hamburgers are made of. In VR however these things can be delivered
as dreams, in the language of the subconscious - I'm not convinced
that the brain isn't pretty dramatically compromisable by presenting
dream-like imagery to it, like messages wrapped in dreams, which one
part of the brain interprets as coming from another rather than an
external agent.

I didn't explain that very well. Imagine that a dream is a message
from one part of the mind to another. Like the "internal dialogue"
that most people (but not all!) have is a narrator. Dreams are like
a movie director. Internal signalling apparatus nobody else can hear
the inner voice or see the dreams. It's a shared space between
different parts of us.

So I think if you model surrealism in advertising, and hyperrealism
too, and imagine that wrapped into immersive environments, it might
be possible to (for example) change people's ideas about what a
normal human face looks like. Photo filters on Snapchat or whatever
are already sending people to plastic surgeons asking to be made to
look just like in the processed pictures of themselves. So think of
that, but instead of plastic surgery it's voting and spending
patterns and shifting social norms.

The tech isn't far off. The Oculus Quest 2 has (as far as I can
tell) solved the issues with head tracking and frame rate. Field of
view is still too narrow. But that's a problem that goes away by
spending more money. Great head tracking was simply impossible at
any price until pretty recently.

So it's on the way: designer realities intended to distort the real
world. Malefic dreams. We've never managed to really nail down the
links between what people see and what people do in a proper
statistical way. Violent video games don't seem to make people more
violent.

But advertising makes people buy and vote and change their
priorities and refocus what they care about. Powerful indeed.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #28 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 4 Jan 22 23:12

    <scribbled by bslesins Tue 4 Jan 22 23:12>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #29 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 4 Jan 22 23:53

    
As Google’s many failed products show, being a tech giant with
practically unlimited cash and many billions of users doesn’t
guarantee a hit product. Meta to me looks a lot like Google Glass -
it’s a rich geek’s idea of what people will want. And Facebook has
had a few failures of its own. Remember Libra? (Maybe not.)

Tech giants can afford to fail a lot and keep trying. They’ll be
fine. But after a while the pile of failures generates enough
skepticism that they seem less threatening outside their core
business.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #30 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 22 00:30

    
Apple's worth three trillion.  A trillion was a lot, but the
pandemic and the Biden administration have been more than kind to
them.

They've tripled their wealth in a mere couple of years, and I'm
wondering, why not six trillion, or twelve?  Also, what are they
supposed to do with that wealth and success?  Mind you,  I'm not
resentful about Apple, and among their peers in MAGMA (Microsoft
Apple Google Meta Amazon) they're one of the more benign titans, but
it's strange that they've become so inert.  There's rumors of Apple
cars, there's the Apple head-mounted thing... neither of them
showing up.

Apple fans pretended to be thrilled when Apple put a bunch of
old-fashioned ports back into a laptop. They got rid of the
touchbar.  At last, they're getting rid of the pretenses at
innovation, and the Apple faithful -- who, as a demographic, seem to
be getting rather crotchety and long-in-the-tooth -- that was
somehow cause for celebration.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #31 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 22 00:31

    


Apple did pick a down-and-dirty cyberwar fight with Netanyahu's
plausibly-deniable Israeli cyber-militia, so that was rather daring
and novel... unlike with oil companies, it's been rare for Big Tech
to boldly cross an armed  nation-state.  But Apple kinda had to do
that, because NSO was killing off or betraying some of Apple's elite
customers, high-profile people, politicians, journalists, activists
and (I would rather imagine) top Apple staffers, too.

So that was a gutsy Tom Clancy-novel  move there, but where's
Apple's "buzz"?  Where's the insane greatness?  They've become so
stodgy... They're censorious, even -- they can no longer abide the
notion of sordid Internet hippie scum such as Tumblr in their
stack-and-ecosystem.  "Think Different -- like our ultra-rich gated
community."  

I can well understand how Apple got here, I saw it happen step by
step, and there's even a cultural logic to it, but I wonder what
they see when they look in their huge gilded mirrors.  "We see three
trillion and we're hankering for six!"  Okay, then what?

Why do they need  any geniuses at their genius bars now, why do they
even hire engineers?  Why don't they just sell little handheld glass
biscuits, that look perfect, and work okay, and never change?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #32 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 22 00:58

    
I'm with Brian Slesins about the Google thing.  Apple people were
eccentric, but Googlers are genuinely weird.  According to my
earlier presumptions, if you had multitalented brainiacs, and you
gave them catering and stuck 'em in a building with no distractions
and an infinite budget, and told them "Make Moon Shots!" they should
have littered the planet with innovations fit to outdo Thomas
Edison.

Their whole original Google reason-for-being was ordering knowledge
and information so that it would become more useful.  You'd assume
this capacity would give Alphabet some brilliant capacity to
execute, but they have the affect of absent-minded professors.  It's
like their frontal lobes are overstuffed, they just can't seem to
deliver.

I guess I can forgive Google for failing to colonize our faces with
Glass and litter our stratosphere with nifty Internet balloons, but
even their core money-making operations, Google search and Google
maps, are getting visibly worse.  Google Maps is truly a planetary
marvel, but it's chokingly baroque.   Google search is merely Google
searching its advertisers pockets for some transaction money. 
Google Search used to convey an impression of limitless brainpower
and now you can't tap on it without being despatched to the mall. 
Worse yet, it's not even a good mall.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #33 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 22 00:58

    

I quite admire Google Translate, especially its eerie ability to
photograph book pages and overlay any language you choose -- as a
traveler, I use Translate a lot, and I'd say it makes me more aware,
intelligent and capable.  But other Google initiatives, like
books.google, or scholar.google, which really felt like a determined
effort to improve civilization -- they're moribund.  They sort-of
want you to use Google Mail, Google Cloud, podcasts, play, drive,
news, their litany of ill-organized services... but they don't care
if you're any better off for doing that.

Google didn't have to become so indifferent and stodgy -- Bezos
isn't stodgy, he's a mid-life crisis divorce guy with rockets
instead of a Cadillac.  Elon Musk has proved that the public loves
louche and eccentric tech entrepreneurs who promise Moon Shots. 
Google could have rebuilt Toronto as a smart-city utopia, and if the
Torontonians didn't like that -- (and they didn't) -- they just
could have built a new Toronto.    

But there's something seedy about them now -- they're like a
Hollywood movie palace fallen on hard times.  Still rich, though. 
Boy, are they ever.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #34 of 420: @jonl (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 22 07:46

    
The wealthy are in a world of their own; I can barely understand how
their lives work. In fact, I don't think about them much, and I
don't think much about tech companies as anything but a source of
tools. I suppose we'll get some exposure to Elon Musk's world, since
he's moved himself and his companies to Austin and other parts of
Texas. And what interests me most about Musk and Bezos is their
devotion to space travel, which always held my attention as a focus
of so much speculative fiction. It's probably not a practical focus
for technologists right now, but they're going for it. Bezos flew
with Captain Kirk, a stunt that captured the popular imagination for
fifteen minutes or so. 

But there's a contradiction here, watching Bezos and Musk and other
tech billionaires live their fantasies while democracy fails and the
climate is on fire. I suppose they're thinking they'll escape a
collapsing world and move to Mars. Or the metaverse, living in game
reality until they explode.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #35 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 22 08:59

    <hidden>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #36 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 22 09:48

    
The future consists of absences as well as novelties, and this month
the Blackberry phone, as a service, ceased to exist.

You can still have a Blackberry brick as a doorstop, but iPhone and
Android did it in.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #37 of 420: When life gives you SARS, you make sarsaparilla (doctorow) Wed 5 Jan 22 10:16

    
@jonl asked me to repost today's edition of Pluralistic, my
blog/daily Twitter threads/daily Mastodon threads/newsletter/Tumblr
feed/RSS. Here's the canonical link:

https://pluralistic.net/2022/01/05/hillrom/#baxter-international

And here's the post:

==

Hospital beds are a monopoly

The great James Boyle tells an important parable about the coining
of the term "ecology." Before the term came into wide use, the
"ecology movement" as we know it was just a bunch of fragmented,
seemingly disconnected issues.

https://thepublicdomain.org/thepublicdomain1.pdf

Like, if you're worried about owls and I'm worried about the ozone
layer, it's not immediately apparent that we're fighting the same
fight. It's not intuitive to link the fate of charismatic nocturnal
avians to the gaseous composition of the upper atmosphere, right?

All that changes with "ecology." The introduction of that conceptual
umbrella term turns 1,000 issues into one movement with 1,000
on-ramps. It welded thousands of fragmented activist causes into a
single, solidaristic force to be reckoned with.

Which brings me to Big Tech.

For years, I've been fighting against Big Tech. There are a lot of
potential allies in the fight to demonopolize our tech world,
because tech is woven into so many facets of our lives: romance,
employment, civics, culture, education, family life, etc. But as
vast as that resistance might be, it's minuscule when compared to
the legions who are harmed by all forms of monopoly.

Monopoly has infected every part of our economy. From running shoes
to pro wrestling, shipping to finance, eyeglasses to semiconductors,
textbooks to novels, candy to oil, movies to music, every part of
our lives is being organized by a handful of massive, lawless
monopolies who openly collude to rig the system against their
customers, their workers, and their communities.

https://www.openmarketsinstitute.org/learn/monopoly-by-the-numbers

That's the bad news. But it's also the good news. It means that pro
wrestling fans have common cause with bank tellers who get screwed
by Wells Fargo, and that both are fighting the same fight as
microbrewers and cheerleaders and meat-packers. It means that as
powerful as these monopolies are, they face a potential resistance
movement that encompasses nearly everyone, save the vanishingly
small number of beneficiaries of monopoly (top executives, finance
bros, and ultra-wealthy shareholders).

All we need to do is realize that owls and the ozone layer are part
of the same fight. All we need to do is name a common enemy
(monopoly) and a common cause (pluralism).

After all, monopolies didn't happen by accident. Since the Reagan
years, orthodox economists have embraced the idea that monopolies
are "efficient" and have demanded that regulators leave them be.

https://locusmag.com/2021/05/cory-doctorow-qualia/

That orthodoxy – part of the neoliberal revolution fomented by the
Chicago School of economics – has been in retreat for years, and
that phenomenon has accelerated through the pandemic as giant
companies boosted their profits while the world burned. The
seemingly impregnable edifice of monopolism may collapse like an
avalanche: slowly, then all at once. Avalanches are triggered by the
cumulative pressure of a myriad of tiny forces. Tiny forces like our
individual voices, railing against the 1,000% increase in eyeglass
prices or gigaships stuck in the Suez canal or the conversion of the
internet into "five giant websites, each filled with text from the
other four."

https://twitter.com/tveastman/status/1069674780826071040

Monopolists and their apologists and enablers do their best to stave
this off, of course. They go to great lengths to obscure the degree
to which our markets are structured by colluding CEOs of giant
companies. They go to even greater lengths to make us think that
each monopolized industry is a unique tale, driven by the distinct
characteristics of its products. For example, tech monopolists like
to pretend that their dominance is the inevitable product of
"network effects":

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2021/08/facebooks-secret-war-switching-costs

One of the main tasks of antimonopolists is revealing the lie behind
this exceptionalism – to show that all our monopolies follow the
same playbook, executed by the same coterie of ultra-rich schemers.
No one does this better than David Dayen, whose 2020 book
"Monopolized" is a masterwork of compact, compelling storytelling
that reveals the connected nature of every kind of monopoly:

https://pluralistic.net/2021/01/29/fractal-bullshit/#dayenu

Dayen is the executive editor of The American Prospect, where he
carries on his excellent antimonopoly reporting. Today, he kicked
off a new section in The Prospect called "Rollup," which tracks
"obscure, under-the-radar monopolies."

https://prospect.org/topics/rollups/

Rollups is just the kind of thing we need: a way to hasten the
antimonopoly movement's "ecology" moment by teaching us that no
matter what kind of corporate fuckery you're laboring under, it has
a common root in monopolism.

(Another excellent source of this cross-industry fuckery-revelation
is Matt Stoller's Substack, BIG.)

https://mattstoller.substack.com/

The inaugural edition of Rollups tells the tale of a monopolist I'd
never heard of: Hillrom, a giant corporation that has rigged the
market for…hospital beds.

https://prospect.org/power/rollups-theres-a-hospital-bed-monopoly/

Dayen's story is based on filings in Linet v Hill-Rom Holdings, a
new federal antitrust lawsuit just filed in the Northern District of
Illinois:

https://www.scribd.com/document/550035591/Linet-v-Hill-Rom-Holdings

The lawsuit accuses Hillrom of cornering the hospital bed market,
with a 70% market share that includes standard beds, ICU beds,
birthing beds, and more. It details "a series of secret, exclusive
deals" that lock in the (monopolized) hospital sector to buying its
beds and accessories, forever.

As Dayen points out, the Hillrom playbook looks a lot like every
monopolist's. The company bought its way to dominance, using its
access to the capital market to acquire and kill or absorb its
competitors. Its acquisitions include companies that produce
bed-adjacent products, creating a kill-zone around hospital beds
where competitors can't find purchase.

Monopoly begets monopoly. Hillrom started out as a division of
Hillenbrand, a massive conglomerate that has monopolized the casket
market and uses its dominance to lock in funeral directors (another
highly monopolized market) and prey on bereaved families, gouging
them on coffins.

https://thehustle.co/casket-industry-monopoly-batesville/

Hillenbrand spun out Hillrom in 2008. Now, Hillrom is a division of
med-tech monopolist Baxter International, whose gadgets are tied to
Hillrom beds and vice-versa – hospitals that invest in Hillrom beds
are arm-twisted into buying Baxter med-tech, and hospitals that buy
Baxter med-tech need to buy "compatible" Hillrom beds.

This Baxter/Hillenbrand hybrid produced a kind of superpredator in
Hillrom, a company with monopolistic conduct in its very DNA.
Hillrom jacked up the prices of its beds and accessories, but then
offered 10% "discounts" to hospitals that agreed to buy 90% of their
gear from Hillrom. As it acquired company after company, it used
technological lock-in to ensure that Hillrom bed customers had to
buy the diagnostics, monitoring, positioning and other products it
got from 15 mergers over 18 years.

Hillrom's sales force routinely lies to hospitals to ensnare them in
its web, stealing the tactics of sleazy card dealers everywhere. The
quotes they provide to hospitals are for "bare bones" beds that are
useless until they are kitted out with high-priced accessories whose
prices are only revealed once the deal is done.

Hillrom has repeatedly settled antitrust suits over this conduct,
paying out over $500,000,000 in the past quarter century. But a fine
is a price: unlike breakups or other muscular antitrust
interventions, cash settlements don't deter monopolies. Instead,
they become part of the cost of business, priced into the next round
of predatory tactics.

Thus it was that after a quarter-century of antitrust fines and
settlements, the company doubled down on its illegal conduct. It
established a "strategic salesforce" that targeted "integrated
delivery networks" (giant, monopolistic hospital chains like HCA and
Providence). This salesforce locked the giants into 5-7 year
exclusive contracts ("corporate enterprise agreements") with Hillrom
for ICU, birthing and standard beds. These agreements required the
hospital chains to force their member hospitals to buy Hillrom beds,
regardless of their own preferences (these Hillrom beds got Hillrom
accessories, like nurse-call buttons).

As Dayen points out, hospitals buy new beds at 10-15 year intervals,
and strive to standardize on a single manufacturer across wards or
facilities. By insinuating itself into this cycle, Hillrom ensures
that its 5-7 exclusive deals become perpetual.

Hillrom's vast patent portfolio expands that perpetual dominance, by
thwarting rivals who want to make interoperable products – say,
systems that integrate with Hillrom's nurse-call system. Nurse-call
systems are hardwired and hospitals that want to change vendors have
to rip their walls apart, so locking nurse-call to both beds and
nurse-station gear is a way for Hillrom to ram its blood-funnel down
the throat of any hospital it can latch onto.

All of this comes from the briefs filed by Linet, a Hillrom
competitor. Linet, in turn, gleaned much of it from Hillrom execs'
boasts on Linkedin and other "open sources." Hillrom itself is a
secretive, brooding giant that refuses to discuss its commercial
operations, and binds its customers over to nondisclosure as well.

Hillrom's target is "control of the entire hospital room." Its
vertical monopoly – which expanded into infusion pumps in 2021 –
prompted Baxter, the monopolist that controlled the infusion pump
market, to buy the company for $10.5B. Baxter neutralized the
competitive threat from Hillrom, and transformed itself into a
"super bundler" that could further the conquest of the hospital
room.

If Baxter rings a bell, you might be thinking of stories about
nationwide shortages of plastic IV bags. Baxter is the monopolist
that cornered the market on these bags, relocated all their
production to tax-free Puerto Rican facilities, which were wiped out
by Hurricane Maria:

https://prospect.org/culture/books/monopolies-are-why-salt-and-water-in-a-bag-
became-scarce-dayen-monopolized-book/

The past two years have been full of stories about esoteric "supply
chain failures." Most of us are fuzzy on what a "supply chain
failure" is, but Hillrom is a supply chain failure in the making.
Every component of your hospital room is being locked into Hillrom's
production, meaning that any idiotic choice they make (like moving
all production to a low-lying, hurricane-emperilled Caribbean
island) will ripple through every part of every hospital room.

This is a whole new level of "hospital bed shortage" – not just a
lack of staff or space, but a finance-optimized, brittle,
concentrated supply chain that holds every sick person, every
laboring mother, every surgical patient hostage.

The only thing worse than letting these ghouls extract massive
profits from our sick and dying would be to squander the opportunity
for action. This is part of our antimonopoly "ecology" moment. If
you're outraged by the beer giants terrorizing your local craft
brewer, or by Disney ripping off Star Wars novelists, or by your
cable company's terrible service and sky-high prices, then this is
your cause. The same tactics that fueled all those monopolies – and
other monopolies – created the Baxter-Hillrom Industrial Complex.

There is an historic opportunity here. The FTC is now under the
direction of Lina Khan, a powerhouse anti-monopolist. She's warned
Baxter-Hillrom that she might unwind their merger, part of the
trillions in mergers that corporate America raced through in a bid
to avoid her oversight.

https://www.law360.com/articles/1433267/hill-rom-baxter-get-ftc-warning-letter
s-for-12-4b-deal

Khan should absolutely do this, especially if unwinding the merger
is a costly, painful process for Baxter-Hillrom. As I told Kara
Swisher and Scott Galloway for their end-of-year edition of the
Pivot podcast, the FTC should make examples of these swaggering
corporate bullies:

https://open.spotify.com/episode/53rBE0EybbjZI1uiKRV001
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #38 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 22 10:40

    
Cory has been calling out the problem of monopoly for a while now.
Strongly suggest subscribing to his newsletter and reading his daily
posts: <https://pluralistic.net/>

(Direct subscription link:
<https://mail.flarn.com/mailman/listinfo/plura-list/>)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #39 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 22 11:23

    
Incidentally, Cory has another thought-provoking piece in Locus
Magazine:
<https://locusmag.com/2022/01/cory-doctorow-science-fiction-is-a-luddite-litera
ture/> (h/t Michael Garfield)

He argues that science fiction is a Luddite literature, and that
most people don't understand what the Luddites were about.

"You really couldn’t ask for a more science-fictional setup: someone
invents a couple of gadgets and everything changes. A whole industry
of skilled workers is threatened. Ancient settlements are razed and
replaced by sheep, their residents turned into internal refugees,
wandering the land. Slavers sail around the world, murdering and
enslaving distant strangers to feed the machine. The entire material
culture of a nation is transformed. Guerilla warfare breaks out.
Machines are smashed. Factories are put to the torch. Guerrillas are
captured and publicly executed. Blood runs through the streets.

"The Luddites weren’t exercised about automation. They didn’t mind
the proliferation of cheap textiles. History is mostly silent on
whether they gave thought to the plight of tenant farmers at home or
enslaved people abroad.

"What were they fighting about? The social relations governing the
use of the new machines. These new machines could have allowed the
existing workforce to produce far more cloth, in far fewer hours, at
a much lower price, while still paying these workers well (the lower
per-unit cost of finished cloth would be offset by the higher sales
volume, and that volume could be produced in fewer hours)."
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #40 of 420: I was oilers1972, now going by (mct67) Wed 5 Jan 22 11:41

    
Great.  Global dystopia instead of something more like this:

https://allpoetry.com/All-Watched-Over-By-Machines-Of-Loving-Grace
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #41 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Wed 5 Jan 22 11:48

    
The folks from Dark Mountain Project
https://www.newstatesman.com/culture/2017/08/dark-mountain-project-and-plan-sa
ve-planet-through-writing took a shot at putting the Luddites back into the discourse, as a way of getting people to ask hard questions about technology.

Pretty impactful in the UK, maybe not so widely known elsewhere.

Climate change is a Luddite problem.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #42 of 420: I was oilers1972, now going by (mct67) Wed 5 Jan 22 11:57

    
"It means that as powerful as these monopolies are, they face a
potential resistance movement that encompasses nearly everyone, save
the vanishingly small number of beneficiaries of monopoly (top
executives, finance bros, and ultra-wealthy shareholders)."

Problem is, they most likely already see the 99% that way.  Which
would only result in the installation of more extreme dictatorships
around the globe, in order to protect (as they see it) their way of
doing and being.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #43 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Wed 5 Jan 22 12:14

    
See also Lessig's work on copyright monopolies.

https://www.wired.com/2001/12/lessig/#:~:text=Monopoly%20controls%20have%20bee
n%20the,the%20rule%20in%20closed%20societies.&text=Before%20the%20monopoly%20s
hould%20be,in%20the%20realm%20of%20software.

His conclusion? The reason we couldn't get any real action on
copyright etc. was systemic corruption. 

https://www.politicallawbriefing.com/2013/04/a-lester-whats-a-lester/

The talk is fantastic. I've linked to a quick summary here.

I'd say Lessig's position is basically "look, the politicians are
all pre-bought via campaign finance and the result is you can't
dislodge the monopolies because the government actively creates them
to pay off the donor class."

Hard to see an obvious next move there. Doesn't mean there isn't
one, just that it's hard to see.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #44 of 420: George Mokray (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 22 12:40

    
Via email from George Mokray:

Howard Rheingold on how the Amish decide what technologies to adopt
or refuse:
<https://www.wired.com/1999/01/amish/>

'It's not just how you use the technology that concerns us. We're
also concerned about what kind of person you become when you use
it.”

Glad to be back with you all this year.  Happy Merry New and Bah
Humbug.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #45 of 420: Evelyn Pine (evy) Wed 5 Jan 22 14:01

    
Wow! I remember that article from back then. . .
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #46 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 5 Jan 22 14:44

    
Facebook may be talking up virtual reality, but meanwhile there’s
more physical stuff than ever getting moved around:

<https://www.cnn.com/2022/01/04/business/traffic-los-angeles-port-record/index.
html>

> For 18 months now, the Port of Los Angeles has received 900,000
container units per month. Pre-pandemic, just one month with numbers
like that would have been a record.

> "We're running now about 17-18 ships a day that are working in
port. That's 70-80% higher productivity than we ever had before
Covid-19," Seroka said.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #47 of 420: (chrys) Wed 5 Jan 22 21:13

    
Thanks to <George Mokray> for adding that bit to the conversation.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #48 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 02:16

    
From our Twitter correspondent Matthew Garrett @mjg59
https://twitter.com/mjg59/status/1478993089507168256?s=21

Everyone: This is not the cyberpunk dystopia we were promised, where
are the flying cars
Fortune: Kazakhstan was responsible for between 12% and 18% of the
Bitcoin hash rate, and the associated power shortages toppled the
government

https://fortune.com/2022/01/05/kazakhstan-internet-bitcoin-mining-mystery-cryp
to/
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #49 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 22 04:42

    
I did not expect the Kazakhstan eruption, and if ie was really
caused by Bitcoin brownouts instead of just a sharp rise in the
state's price for gasoline, that would be hilarious.

Everybody in that Central Asian region expects triumphant Taliban
agents or ISIS truck-bomb martyrs to show up to attack their regime,
so the idea that ihe big-trouble might be French-style working-class
Yellow-Jackets upset about fossil-fuel prices, that's remarkable.

Also: asking the Russians to help repress your population for you. 
Even if they excel at doing it, they're not gonna leave when you say
"thank you."
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #50 of 420: Mark Kraft (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 22 07:38

    
Via email from Mark Kraft:

We talk about Meta, but... their new intended niche is entirely
reliant on selling hardware as a loss leader, like a
headache-inducing game console, hoping to get it back through
software, in-game purchases, ads, selling their user's personal
information, etc.

Meanwhile, Facebook itself - the social media site - is moribund.
Ask anyone with significant prior background on social media sites
about how they work, and if they are honest, they will tell you that
they have a life cycle. People - usually young people - start off
enthusiastically communicating with their friends, but that slows
down... and meanwhile, you are being pushed content that is
increasingly less meaningful and relevant to your life, until
finally you have an algorithm pushing you ideological edgelord B.S.,
and ads designed to feel like ideological edgelord B.S.

Facebook loves to talk about the size of it's fictional user base.
What they don't offer up is any relevant data on how active people
WERE on Facebook, vs. how active they currently are. Reporters
should look into this, because despite every effort they can make to
incite users to post one more time, their stickiness has undoubtedly
taken a real plunge.

Their userbase is literally growing up... and those who haven't
grown up and left are stuck with something that increasingly feels
like the experience of a late-stage Usenet.

If Facebook didn't have the whole world to expand into, their
flagship brand would be in real trouble over the next few years...
and, guess what? They don't anymore. Nationalism and politics has
seen to that. I suspect their moment is even fading fast in India,
as Modi's rejection of Chinese companies like TikTok will inevitably
boost the fortunes of Indian social media companies, ESPECIALLY
amongst younger demographics, of which India has many.

Twitter is, in many, many ways, not that hot when it comes to its
functionality. But at least it's legitimately about something that
it does measurably better than anyone else, and should continue to
do so for quite awhile... whereas the one thing that Facebook is
legitimately good at is tracking you across the internet. But even
Google does that better. It reminds me more and more of pre-dotcom
bust content aggregator, which bought out built a "network" of
somewhat disconnected sites and functions, while slapping "punch the
monkey" ads on every page. 

Facebook is an aging, creaking exercise in desperation, increasingly
full of dead people, trying to get you to squeeze out one more post,
one more click, one more share. The kids know it's monumentally
uncool clickbait where both the site and your parents spy on you,
and have moved on in droves. And honestly, it's probably starting to
happen to Instagram too.

So the question needs to be asked... is Facebook really the right
company to mainstream Meta, capable of creating exciting software
that dominates the marketplace and makes back the losses they incur
on every VR headset? Are they going to be some kind of VR middleman
version of Juicero, trying to squeeze all the juice it can out of
the market and its users, like a twisted mutation of the Apple store
and Google Adsense? Or are they just too lame for the game, risking
major losses as their core business dies off?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #51 of 420: Jon Lebkowsk (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 22 07:39

    <scribbled by jonl Thu 6 Jan 22 07:40>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #52 of 420: Mark Kraft (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 22 07:40

    
Via email from Mark Kraft:

So yeah, while we view Facebook as a monolith, it's probably best
seen as a content aggregator that's vulnerable, both in terms of the
aging of its users and potential declines in the sales or price
valuations in the online advertising market. Relatively small shifts
here and there can lead to embarrassing, long-term declines in their
stock performance, downsizing, and billions of dollars flowing
elsewhere.

There are good arguments that the online advertising market is
slipping away from the big players and towards newer, more
independent online ad players, for all the best reasons. (i.e.
Monopolistic price padding, in an online world where the room for
ads is seemingly as endless as the room for new housing developments
in/around Vegas.) The end result should lead to more competition and
lower ad prices / corporate revenues.

Facebook absolutely doesn't talk much about their weaknesses, but
it's entirely possible that they see the writing on the wall, and
are "all in" on Meta like a football team is "all in" on throwing
the ball at 3rd down and 14, with 49 seconds left on the clock.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #53 of 420: Gonza Barrio (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 22 07:41

    
Via email from Gonza Barrio:

I'm eager to listen to your comments about the fall of Afghanistan,
the biggest military humilliation in the history of the USA, and the
upcoming cold war/hot war developments in Ukraine and Taiwan,

Also I would like to hear @Bruces opinion on his Afghanistan piece,
twenty years later:
http://web.archive.org/web/20131020093146/http://www.edge.org/documents/whatno
w/
whatnow_sterling.html


I'd also like to hear about your opinions on the
pharma-tech-solutionism vaccine discourse; specially on the
differences between early 2021 optimism-herd immunity and the
current best-case scenario (mRNA vaccines are only really useful if
you're elderly or immunocompromised; otherwise they're only valid
to...
*check notes with the New England Journal of Medicine*
https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc2102507
*reduce two-three days the infection period*)

because, back in july, it was clear that the protective effects of
the vaccine wouldn't be much different than the previous hCoV
vaccines (that's a few months tops)
see:
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.07.27.21261237v1
"The average half-life of neutralizing activity in the vaccinees was
approximately 67.8 days"

Maybe was it arrogant to claim to be able to develop a vaccine
against a coronavirus (something that has never been done) in the
shortest period of development of a vaccine ever-- or was it just
naked greed?

I'm sad to read statements like Jon Lebkowsky's here in the SOTW
"It's like the average global IQ dropped a few dozen points.", maybe
you're just too much into the american-news-cycle of polarization,
but to me it sounds like you're happy to be pawns supporting very
bad public health policies.

Anyway thank you very much, and eager to hear yourcomments
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #54 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 22 08:33

    
*I just got an email screed distributed by the current editor of
WIRED, who's having a crisis of conscience over the historic legacy
of the magazine.

*As the guy who rather grimly "Saw the Future of War" on the very
first issue of WIRED, I can't help but find this funny.

*I don't want to pick on him for writing this, because I think he's
doing the kind of zeitgeist thinking that a magazine editor properly
ought to try to do, but the 2020s, as an era, sounds like this.  It
doesn't sound much like the nineties, oughts or even the teens.

*You see, it's not about bing pro-tech, or even about being the
backlash against tech; basically, it's all about vast, inexorable
crisis and finding some reason to keep turning pages about it.

***


In the next few decades, virtually every financial, social, and
governmental institution in the world is going to be radically
upended by one small but enormously powerful invention: the
blockchain.

Do you believe that? Or are you one of those people who think the
blockchain and crypto boom is just a massive, decade-long fraud—the
bastard child of the Dutch tulip bubble, Bernie Madoff’s Ponzi
scheme, and the wackier reaches of the libertarian internet? More
likely, you—like me—are at neither of these extremes. Rather, you’re
longing for someone to just show you how to think about the issue
intelligently and with nuance instead of always falling into the
binary trap.

Binaries have been on my mind a lot since I took over the editor’s
chair at WIRED last March. That’s because we’re at what feels like
an inflection point in the recent history of technology, when
various binaries that have long been taken for granted are being
called into question.

When WIRED was founded in 1993, it was the bible of
techno-utopianism. We chronicled and championed inventions that we
thought would remake the world; all they needed was to be unleashed.
Our covers featured the brilliant, renegade, visionary—and mostly
wealthy, white, and male—geeks who were shaping the future,
reshaping human nature, and making everyone’s life more efficient
and fun. They were more daring, more creative, richer and cooler
than you; in fact, they already lived in the future. By reading
WIRED, we hinted, you could join them there!

If that optimism was binary 0, since then the mood has switched to
binary 1. Today, a great deal of media coverage focuses on the
damage wrought by a tech industry run amok. It’s given us Tahrir
Square, but also Xinjiang; the blogosphere, but also the manosphere;
the boundless opportunities of the Long Tail, but also the
unremitting precariousness of the gig economy; mRNA vaccines, but
also Crispr babies. WIRED hasn’t shied away from covering these
problems. But they’ve forced us—and me in particular, as an incoming
editor—to ponder the question: What does it mean to be WIRED, a
publication born to celebrate technology, in an age when tech is
often demonized?

To me, the answer begins with rejecting the binary. Both the
optimist and pessimist views of tech miss the point. The lesson of
the last 30-odd years is not that we were wrong to think tech could
make the world a better place. Rather, it’s that we were wrong to
think tech itself was the solution—and that we’d now be equally
wrong to treat tech as the problem. It’s not only possible, but
normal, for a technology to do both good and harm at the same time.
A hype cycle that makes quick billionaires and leaves a trail of
failed companies in its wake may also lay the groundwork for a
lasting structural shift (exhibit A: the first dotcom bust). An
online platform that creates community and has helped citizens oust
dictators (Facebook) can also trap people in conformism and
groupthink and become a tool for oppression. As F. Scott Fitzgerald
famously said, an intelligent person should be able to hold opposed
ideas in their mind simultaneously and still function.

Yet debates about tech, like those about politics or social issues,
still seem to always collapse into either/or. Blockchain is either
the most radical invention of the century or a worthless shell game.
The metaverse is either the next incarnation of the internet or just
an ingeniously vague label for a bunch of overhyped things that will
mostly fail. Personalized medicine will revolutionize health care or
just widen its inequalities. Facebook has either destroyed democracy
or revolutionized society. Every issue is divisive and tribal. And
it’s generally framed as a judgment on the tech itself—“this tech is
bad” vs. “this tech is good”—instead of looking at the underlying
economic, social, and personal forces that actually determine what
that tech will do.

There’s been even more of this kind of binary, tech-centered
thinking as we claw our way out of the pandemic. Some optimists
claim we’re on the cusp of a “Roaring 2020s” in which mRNA and
Crispr will revolutionize disease treatment, AI and quantum
computers will exponentially speed up materials science and drug
discovery, and advances in battery chemistry will make electric
vehicles and large-scale energy storage (and maybe even flying
taxis) go mainstream. If you want to see a gloomy future, on the
other hand, there’s no shortage of causes: Digital surveillance is
out of control, the carbon footprint of cryptocurrency mining and
large AI models is expanding, the US–China tech arms race is
accelerating, the gig-work precariat is swelling, and the internet
itself is balkanizing.

This tug-of-war between optimism and pessimism is the reason why I
said this feels like an inflection point in the history of tech. But
even that term, “inflection point,” falls into the binary trap,
because it presumes that things will get either worse or better from
here. It is, yet again, a false dichotomy. This kind of thinking
helps nobody make sense of the future that’s coming. To do that—and
to then push that future in the right direction—we need to reject
this 0-or-1 logic.

Which brings me to the question of what WIRED is for.

Fundamentally, WIRED has always been about a question: What would it
take to build a better future?* We exist to inspire people who want
to build that future. We do it not by going into Pollyannaish
raptures about how great the future is going to be, nor dire
jeremiads about how bad things could get, but by taking an
evenhanded, clear-eyed look at what it would take to tackle the
severe challenges the world faces. Our subject matter isn’t
technology, per se: It’s those challenges—like climate change,
health care, global security, the future of democracy, the future of
the economy, and the dizzying speed of cultural change as our
offline and online worlds mingle and remix. Technology plays a
starring role in all of these issues, but what’s clearer today than
ever is that it’s people who create change, both good and bad. You
cannot explain the impacts of technology on the world without deeply
understanding the motives, incentives, and limitations of the people
who build and use it. And you cannot hope to change the world for
the better unless you can learn from the achievements and the
mistakes other people have made.

So I think WIRED’s job is to tell stories about the world’s biggest
problems, the role tech plays in them—whether for good or bad—and
the people who are trying to solve them. These aren’t all feel-good
stories by any means: there are villains as well as heroes, failures
as well as successes. Our stance is neither optimism nor pessimism,
but rather the belief that it's worth persisting even when things
seem hopeless. (I call it “Greta Thunberg optimism.”) But whatever
the story, you should find something to learn from it—and, ideally,
the inspiration to make a positive difference yourself.

Of course, that’s not all we exist to do. WIRED has also always been
a home for ambitious, farsighted ideas—sometimes prescient,
sometimes wild, sometimes both at the same time. (Fitzgerald again!)
We shouldn’t get carried away by hype; too many of our covers in the
past promised that this or that invention would “change everything.”
But we shouldn’t shy away from pushing the envelope either,
stretching people’s minds and showing them possible futures that
they might not otherwise dare to imagine. We’ll be critical but not
cynical; skeptical but not defeatist. We won’t tell you what to
think about the future, but how to think about it.

Finally, we exist to do the basic hard work of journalism—following
the important news, explaining how to think about it, and holding
power, particularly tech power, accountable.

Over the next few months, you should see our coverage starting to
coalesce more clearly around those core global challenges—climate,
health, and so on. Because these issues are indeed global, you
should also start to see a more international range of stories: One
of the less obvious but very big changes is that we are merging the
US and UK editions of WIRED, previously two entirely separate
publications, into a single site at WIRED.com. (If you’re a regular
visitor to the site, you may have noticed that we recently launched
a new homepage, designed to make it easier for us to showcase the
work we’re most proud of and for you to find stories that interest
you.) We’ll still publish two separate print editions, though
they’ll share many stories. Our US and UK newsrooms are already
working as one, and you’ll see all their journalism here on this
site. With more writers making up a single team, we’ll be able to go
deeper into some of these key areas.

Above all, we’ll continue to do what WIRED is best at—bringing you
delightful, fascinating, weird, brilliantly told stories from all
around the world of people taking on extraordinary problems. Our
founder Louis Rossetto wrote that WIRED was where you would discover
“the soul of our new society in wild metamorphosis.” The wild
metamorphosis continues, and while its mechanisms may be
technological, the soul behind them is deeply and unavoidably human.
Where the human and the technological meet: That’s where WIRED
lives, and it’s where we aim to take you, every day.

Gideon Lichfield | Global Director, WIRED

Note: I owe a big debt of gratitude to Tom Coates, who was pivotal
in helping me think about the history of WIRED and see the
opportunity for the role it can play today.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #55 of 420: John Coate (tex) Thu 6 Jan 22 09:00

    
Are any blockchain advocates addressing the massive amount of
(mostly carbon intensive) electricity it requires?  If there are, I
have not run across them.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #56 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 6 Jan 22 09:18

    
"The biggest military humiliation in the history of the USA" was the
loss in Vietnam. Afghanistan was not as big a deal because the US
never had a substantial number of lives at stake in it. Anyone who
had ever paid any attention to Afghanistan's history could see from
the beginning that the attack on al Qaeda leadership at Tora Bora
might have made some sense, but the attempt to deny Afghanistan to
the Taliban would require way more commitment of American lives and
materiel than were justified.

Afghanistan was an embarrassing tar baby that never dominated US
politics or international politics as Vietnam did.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #57 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 6 Jan 22 09:30

    
Yes, there are a variety of takes on fixing cryptocurrency
electricity usage.

For Ethereum: they are moving to proof of stake. And have been for
several years. Maybe this year? The new design was over-complicated
and they've learned the virtues of simplicity.

There is also Chia which tries to replace mining with very large
files of gibberish that act like bingo cards. They briefly caused a
run on solid state hard drives but there are now plenty of bingo
cards and the easy profits are over, so they're probably not
damaging now? They don't seem to be getting any traction, but who
knows, maybe Musk will tweet them?

There are also miners who try to find less-damaging ways to do it.
For example, generating electricity from methane from oil wells that
would otherwise be vented to the atmosphere. But I don't think they
have much market share yet?

And then there are those who say it's not so bad really, the
benefits outweigh the costs. (Handwave.)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #58 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Thu 6 Jan 22 09:51

    
Ukraine: Judging from events to day, I'm not sure what Russia could
do at this point in regards to Ukraine, short of a nuclear attack,
that would prompt the USA or EU nations to send more than stern
messages and sanctions to its defense.

One thing it's possible to imagine – which isn't to say it's
probable – is that other nations enact more comprehensive financial
reforms that better lock rich Russians' money inside the country.
That might drive some conciliatory action from Putin.

On the other hand, how much rational reasoning is involved in
Russia's predation on Ukraine, vs aspirations about a return to
empire? Russia can push little countries on its borders around, but
it's no longer a great power capable of major military actions
against powerful nations. In the 21st century, does it really gain
an advantage from restoring a 19th-century style geographic buffer
between it and the rest of Europe?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #59 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 6 Jan 22 09:55

    
Using lots of electrical energy isn't inherent in blockchain
technology. It's a result of the strategy Bitcoin chose for
competitive mining. Their nonsensical, reductionist proof of stake
is willingness to waste huge amounts of energy and of implementation
effort.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #60 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 6 Jan 22 10:04

    
Beyond the environment costs, though, I wonder about the cultural
costs of the rise of gambling 2.0, investment edition. It turns out
that not only any cryptocurrency but any small stock can be
converted into a fun gambling game with a bit of promotion on social
media. The new online casino is anywhere you can attract enough
players to have some fun.

Meanwhile video games are turning into gambling games too, since
there is money to be made in blurring the distinction between
playing games for fun and gambling as much as possible.

The potential was always there, but now it seems like an
inevitability. People are going to gamble on their phones and the
SEC telling Robinhood to stop with the confetti isn't going to
change that.

Maybe eventually it will become sort-of respectable, like Las Vegas?
I wonder when an Indian tribe starts a cryptocurrency?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #61 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 6 Jan 22 10:24

    
<59> I assume you're being metaphorical but "proof of stake" is
confusing here - it's not what Bitcoin uses.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #62 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 6 Jan 22 10:44

    
The validity of every blockchain transaction is guaranteed by
cryptographic signatures added to it by parties that have a stake in
the transaction. For supposedly-authority-free Bitcoin a party
establishes its status as a stakeholder through sweat equity. Other
blockchain strategies could establish proof of stake in different
ways.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #63 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Thu 6 Jan 22 10:53

    
I wish WIRED well in their attempt:

> We'll be critical but not cynical; skeptical but not defeatist.
> We won't tell you what to think about the future, but how to think
> about it.

I would like to take this as inspirational, while being mindful of the
growing awareness that 'knowing how to think' is itself now a subject
of scientific scrutiny. We may be in the midst of a paradigm shift
regarding what it means 'to think.'
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #64 of 420: Ari Davidow (ari) Thu 6 Jan 22 10:59

    
I appreciate Wired's desire to cover technology, etc. But, they are
an entertainment medium, not a tools-connector. I remember vividly
deciding to drop my subscription back early on when they had an
article on someone doing some great work connecting the former
Yugoslavia to the still-relatively-new internet. I was heading off
to Yugoslavia that fall and had worked on some internet projects.
But, there was nothing in the article that helped me connect with
the people the article was about. That's standard for entertainment
(and a desirable feature from the perspective of most people subject
to such articles), but also different from, say, what I would have
expected had the Whole Earth Review still existed.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #65 of 420: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Thu 6 Jan 22 11:06

    

<tex>, thanks for bringing up the issue of electricity usage/waste in
mining cryptocurrencies. a few years back, i listened to a blockchain
expert on the Zigzag podcast breathlessly extol the environmental virtues
of newer server farms/mines/whatever they call 'em being set up in places
like the Portland Oregon area...

because Northwest energy is "clean", according to the expert! it's hydro!
ain't it great?

and i'm like, TELL IT TO THE SALMON, you fool. 

tell it to the tribes who still mourn the proper flowing of the Columbia
River, the drowning of their traditional fishing sites at Celilo Falls to
build the dam to make the "clean" electricity that kills the salmon runs. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #66 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 6 Jan 22 11:11

    
<62> I know what you mean but in the jargon, Bitcoin's algorithm is
called "proof of work." "Proof of stake" is a term used for an
alternative family of algorithms where a "stake" ties up funds by an
owner of the cryptocurrency. They pledge to only approve valid
transactions, and if they don't they risk losing their stake.

Bitcoin miners don't necessarily own Bitcoin - their investments are
external to the system. Some argue that that this is important.

But anyway, yes there are alternatives and I hope they do well due
to the effect on climate emissions.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #67 of 420: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Thu 6 Jan 22 12:20

    
This is a good summary of the multiple independent cases against
cryptocurrency.

<https://www.stephendiehl.com/blog/against-crypto.html>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #68 of 420: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Thu 6 Jan 22 12:23

    
(Note that Diehl doesn't even mention the case discussed here, that
cryptocurrency wastes energy on a planet-wrecking scale.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #69 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 6 Jan 22 12:37

    
That's very good.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #70 of 420: Axon (axon) Thu 6 Jan 22 13:24

    
Crypto is just Amway for incels.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #71 of 420: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Thu 6 Jan 22 13:46

    



haaaa!
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #72 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 14:53

    
John Coate:
https://twitter.com/avalancheavax/status/1456334992687128577

The Avalanche blockchain has been Net Zero since COP26. Most of the
proof of stake chains have negligible CO2 consumption - 500, 1000
tons a year - in line with small web apps or cloud storage like
DropBox.

Bitcoin is a total monster, though. It's >10 years old, and its age
is showing. It's a dinosaur.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #73 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 14:57

    
Virtual Sea Monkey: No draft for Afghanistan, or Iraq.

Vietnam was much, much worse. I am too young to really get it: only
knew a few veterans, and never really had my understanding of their
war *click* for me, but whatever it was, it was *super bad*. 

The thing about it not clicking: I have basic sense of the history,
I have a crude understanding of the draft, but it just didn't *land*
for me emotionally - the vets I talked about it with didn't manage
to bridge the gap between their experience and mine. So my
understanding remains academic.

Which is unfortunate. I really wanted to *get it*.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #74 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 15:06

    
Stephen Diehl: I know him well :) He's an old friend of mine.

A world class cryptographer whose company did not choose to issue a
token.

If he applied that critical eye to, say, US indebtedness both
personal and Federal, I have no doubt he would have very serious
arguments against that entire system. Same for VISA, SWIFT, and the
rest of the banking, credit cards, and consumer finance system.

Then we could start in on how IPOs work and the stock market in
general.

Then the biggie: pension funds, and also State pension systems.

Blockchain is part of this world. It is new and responsive to the
needs of the moment, but it's as flawed as any other human
construction - just newer.

It's as simple as that: blockchain is a response to much bigger
problems. It solves some problems, and creates others, *as is the
nature of all things*. When was the last time we had a technology
which had no down sides.

We're refining it now: fixing proof of work, sorting out speed and
efficiency, working with regulators to get clarity in the grey areas
- it's evolving. But in the times we are in, what technology do you
think could create a perfect fix?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #75 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 22 15:10

    
Vinay, what most people hear about re. blockchain is the speculative
stuff, what I believe <axon> was referring to when he said "Amway
for incels." What are some use cases, other than tokens and
speculative investment, where the blockchain is actually being used
effectively and making a difference? And how do you expect that to
evolve in 2022?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #76 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 6 Jan 22 15:18

    
At home we had a sense that society was irretrievably divided that
was as strong as what we feel now, divided across lines that weren't
all the same as now.

Some people really believed in the rationale for the Vietnam War,
blocking the spread of Communism in Southeast Asia. The observation
that the US was directly continuing French imperialism never gained
much traction, largely because the US never stood to receive much
imperial benefit from the war. For most Americans all the wars in
the Middle East have been more distant and more abstract.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #77 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 15:28

    
On covid: February 26 of 2000 - nearly two years ago - I estimated
about a million covid deaths in America. 

Vinay @leashless
https://twitter.com/leashless/status/1232750570668199942
#CoronaVirusPandemic Here's what to expect.

1) >50% of people will catch the virus at some point
2) <1% of those people will die

In America, that means about a million deaths. Sounds a lot? Same as
4 months of normal rate mortality. 50/50 you won't know anyone who
dies of it.

=====

Don't believe anybody who tells you we didn't know it was coming.
We've known something like this, probably a lot worse, was coming
for decades.

Why the governments didn't get on top of it properly I do not know.
It's been an absolute farce.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #78 of 420: Angie Coiro (coiro) Thu 6 Jan 22 15:30

    
(A moment's interruption to request that, if you tweet about this
conversation, please tag it #SotW2022. Thanks! 

We now return you to our regular Welling ... )
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #79 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 6 Jan 22 15:33

    
That's an EXTRA burden of four months' worth of normal mortality.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #80 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 15:52

    
"Amway for incels" is cute, but a note on incels.

Autism. A very serious percentage of the incel population are on the
autism spectrum: they're wailing in pain about lacking the
capability to interface with society or find partners who will
accept them as they are.

It is, in short, generally ableism of the worst kind.

Sure, there may be some neurotypical incels who are simply assholes
but if instead of "incel" you think "bitter, fucked up autistic
people who can't function in society because of their disabilities,
and are held up for public ridicule by people who have no fear of
being made accountable for their actions" you would be closer to the
mark.

It's pretty obvious when you see it. I don't know whether ASD is 10%
of incels or 90%, but it's a culture absolutely rooted in autism and
their own jokes and memes make that abundantly clear. 

https://www.spectrumnews.org/features/deep-dive/radical-online-communities-and
-their-toxic-allure-for-autistic-men/

Mocking people on the spectrum should not be tolerated, and the
incel discourse has to change to reflect that a lot of them are
struggling very, very hard to socialize in this society, without the
neurological advantages that most of us have when attempting it. And
I'm sure their suicide rates are massively elevate - if anybody
cared enough about them to check.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #81 of 420: Peter Meuleners (pjm) Thu 6 Jan 22 16:09

    
I'm on the autism spectrum and I take exception to a lot of that
post.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #82 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 16:11

    
Interested in hearing your thoughts.

Obviously many incels are on the autism spectrum does not mean that
many people on the autism spectrum are incels.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #83 of 420: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Thu 6 Jan 22 16:20

    
Self-identifying incels have murdered at least 61 people in the
last few years but tell us more about how this is ableist.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #84 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 16:25

    
How many of those incels were on the autism spectrum?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #85 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Thu 6 Jan 22 16:26

    
Good conversation, all. and thanks again to Jon for roping me into
the State of the World again. I just returned from Cyprus 2 days
ago, where I just curated the latest exhibition at Neme Art Center,
called "Through the Mesh: Media, Borders, and Firewalls" with Wade
Wallerstein of Transfer Gallery, Geert Lovink as our keynote
speaker, and Negin Ehtesabian as our guest artist, live from Iran
(we had to fight the Cultural ministry to get her in the travel
ban). We saw the Eschelon facility in Akrotiri, the Green Line in
Nicosia, and the St. Nicholas of the Cats Monastery. Seems they had
a snake infestation and St. Helen of Byzantium sent St. Nicholas
with cats to cure the infestation. Didn't see a single snake. Lots
of cats.  Cutest monastery on the planet.

And we were on the beach. Too cold to go in, but beautiful
nonetheless.

And hello to Vinay, who I've spent copious time at conferences and
in Dubai, and Bruce, who would ask "What'd ya find cool this year?"
at Jon's.

BTw, I'm back in America. Took a tenure track job at a small liberal
arts college in Minnesota, for family reasons. I miss Dubai, though,
especially with the expo running. That'll be a topic.

I've actually spent a lot of time in Kazakhstan, and did workshops
for the US Embassy there. Weird place; Almaty varies from nice
post-Soviet to proto-Borat near the bus station, traffic control is
optional, and the notions of identity are just odd to me. (The
indigenous Kazakhs identify with BLM instead of US Indigenous
discourses,
 and vary between post soviet atheist, Muslim, Shamanic Tengrist,
and batshit crazy at times) Did you know it's the 9th largest
country by landmass, but only 15+ million...

So, what do I think is going on there? The gas prices are a
pretense, fueled by frustration with the Tokayev administration's
policies. KZ is fairly comfortable if you are rich or connected. But
there have been frequent lockdowns and repressions, and I see
colleagues getting arrested who I've known in my time there.
Vigorous protest scene.

Energy shortages linked to crypto? If so, it isn't Kazakh, but
likely Chinese. I do know that the Tehran outages were due in part
to Chinese crypto farms leeching energy off the grids in south Iran,
and I would not be surprised with the One Road plan that China might
have mega coin farms there too.  Don't take any of this stuff at
face value. The truth is that the Qazaqs have been bristling at the
social problems there, and this isn't about gas at all. They want a
Western-style parliamentary democracy.

And interesting that a lot of the topics have been Western, lots
more to discuss.

Musk, Don't Look Up, and the Starlink/Chinese controversy,
Bruce's comments on Wired.
Much more.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #86 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 16:29

    
And how many incels have taken their own lives in that period?

What are their suicide rates like?

https://www.vox.com/2018/6/20/17314846/incel-support-group-therapy-black-pill-
mental-health

Some very very bad stuff is happening here. Stopping it is not going
to come from further demonizing these people: a lot of them probably
need professional help, and their subculture is going to have to be
dismantled very carefully indeed if more people aren't going to kill
others or themselves as it gets done.

I don't even know which agency would do it. Homeland security? The
FBI?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #87 of 420: Angie (coiro) Thu 6 Jan 22 16:53

    
This is fascinating. 

I have to wonder if empathy/sympathy/understanding/tolerance comes
more easily to men, as they're not the targets of the hatred and
even violence generated by that community. 

As a journalist of many years, I've got a fairly well-controlled gag
reflex. But skimming those sites for research - well, let's just say
there aren't enough showers in the world. And the idea that we could
"demonize" people spewing that stuff is hard to swallow.

I don't know that drawing a connection between those "communities"
(hellholes) and those with autism helps the causes of understanding
and tolerance, ultimately. Autistic or not, it takes a certain kind
of wiring, and a vile hatred of half the people on the planet, to
find any of that acceptable.

I don't have autism. I think if I were on the high-functioning end
of that spectrum*, my reaction to an assertion that I'm
over-represented among incels would hit me in a very bad way.

I'd like to hear more from Peter about how that post strikes him. 

*I'm working to be careful and respectful in my language here. If
I'm mistaken in my choice of words, please correct me.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #88 of 420: Angie Coiro (coiro) Thu 6 Jan 22 16:54

    
Addendum: I'm off to read the article Vinay linked, and will weigh
in with any changes to the above.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #89 of 420: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Thu 6 Jan 22 17:03

    
Mozilla backed off their crypto nonsense. Well, they are "reviewing" it.

<https://twitter.com/mozilla/status/1479143342495744009>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #90 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 6 Jan 22 17:12

    
This is a worthwhile topic while we're at it:
https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/5qhwjo/eli5_how_come_we_ha
ve_twice_as_many_female/

Basically about 60% of the men who ever existed didn't succeed in
passing on their genes to the present generation. Most of them just
didn't have kids.

Hard to find stats on non-paternity in America but it seems to be
that 10% to 20% of men have zero children.
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2018/nov/17/male-childlessness-not-re
producing-what-am-i

My suggestion is that the incels are the first large group of people
(remember: there are a fair number of female incels, they are not
all men - I think?) who are actually reckoning with these kinds of
facts in a collective way. We've gone from "a couple of folks in the
village who didn't marry because nobody would have them" through to
vast numbers of people talking about their feelings of total
rejection online together.

I think a parallel case *might* be the "pro-ana" communities where
young women (mostly, I'm sure there are men too) herd each-other
into the jaws of suicide by voluntary starvation. Same general
degree of toxicity, but with an absence of violent murder as an
outcome: mostly women rather than mostly men, I guess. Fewer guns.

An awful lot of people who feel broken and mal-adapted in ways which
they think, sometimes with good reason, will never get better,
talking about what life is for and what life is worth...

It's not that surprising that a few percent conclude it is worth
nothing.

I don't have a solution for this, but I know that demonization and
stigmatization will make it worse rather than better, and push the
"less radicalized" towards the horrible extremes.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #91 of 420: Andrew Alden (alden) Thu 6 Jan 22 17:40

    
Thanks, all for your points. <axon>'s quip started this side loop and can we
close it now?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #92 of 420: John Coate (tex) Thu 6 Jan 22 18:15

    
Ok, I will change the subject. 

I am becoming worried (I guess you could call it) that the people
who planned the "Green Bay Sweep" stuff where a bunch of GOP
Congresspeople would work with Pence to de-certify the electoral
count and remand it all to the states, where they control more state
houses and thus would win the Presidency, will not be found by the
DOJ to have committed a prosecutable crime with their coy
explanation that they were interpreting the wording of the
Constitution differently, but legitimately, and that they never
planned for the mob to go violent. Thus none of them pay any legal
price while all the shock troops go down,though they will stand back
and stand by wearing that badge of martyrdom for the next time.

So, then it remains to be made clear whether or not Trump, gleefully
watching TV while it was all going down, in his "supreme dereliction
of duty" did in fact commit a crime by doing nothing, given that he
said "peacefully" and all that other BS in his speech at the rally.

This to me is their path into the clear.  Coupled with the Supreme
Court keeping it hands off of stopping these voter suppression laws
in the state, or nullifying or neutering whatever this year's
Congress passes relating to voter suppression - which I think they
will do if it assume too much authority over the states to their
liking.

Some of us here well remember Watergate and its details and how it
unfolded. It was the GOP turning on Nixon that changed it all. Yes
the tapes made it easier for them. But fast forward to today: will
whatever is equivalent that, when it comes out from the January 6
Congressional Panel, cause the GOP to change because the principle
is just too big to ignore?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #93 of 420: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Thu 6 Jan 22 21:31

    
"Principle? I'm not familiar with this term." - every Republican
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #94 of 420: Gary Gach (ggg) Thu 6 Jan 22 22:00

    
 Two points for possible expansion …

<58> Is China/Taiwan parallel to, or extremely different from …
Russia/Ukraine?  ( Comments welcome. )

<74> I gets the debt chain and thence VISA, SWIFT, banking (
including but not limited to fractional reserve ), consumer finance.
I wouldn't mind, on the other hand, a post breaking out / unpacking
/ elaborating on "how IPOs work and the stock market in general."

Bonus:  shining the light upon pension funds & State pension
systems, and the shadows that might cast … on State of the World 

This year's State of the World may be starting off better than the
state of the world in and of itself: may it continue.  Thank you,
one and all 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #95 of 420: chipper (cpm) Fri 7 Jan 22 05:23

    
just a regular middle aged fellow here.

I don't get cryptocurrency
I don't get NFTs
I don't get FB Meta
I really don't see any utility in blockchain *at all*. Feel like my
declining cognitive dexterity takes a bad hit every time I mentally
process some tiny aspect of the implications of it. complexity for
complexity's sake seems not just pointless, but actively
hostile/destructive. Not everything requires more orders of
magnitude of abstraction to be useful. yet still another case of
'less is more'.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #96 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Fri 7 Jan 22 05:23

    
Re: Politics, Jan. 6th, etc.
Having been outside of the USA for the whole tenure of the Evil
Carrot, my take is that Americans (myself not considering himself
one, but a hybrid, as half my family is Iranian) were building this
situation for a long, long time. The value of the US-built from WWII
has been sucked out but the plutocrats, sent overseas; the distrust
of the government has been eroding since Nixon, Neoliberalist
destruction of the middle class since Reagan (freezing of wages,
reconfiguring of the educational system for minimum critical
thinking, privatization, post 9/11 militarization of police and
populist culture).  But Americans just have this idea that America
is unassailable, and Fortress America will never fall. Such is the
way of American Exceptionalism.

For all its issues, I often have a better quality of life in places
like Turkey, Bulgaria, and I won't say the UAE, as that was a posh
life, but at least they had their shit together in regards to
vaccination and organization.

Watching from afar, I watched Predators lazily sailing out to the
Gulf, and every time Trump didn't get to touch the glowing orb
F-22's roared over my apartment in Abu Dhabi.  My wife said, "At
least there was;t a bomb...", as she was bombed by Saddam for the
first 10 years of her life.

My point is that in the 5 years I was overseas, I saw an absolute
power vacuum in the US, the world stopped caring about us for
leadership, and American politics became The Apprentice.

I don't think Jan. 6th is being taken a tenth as seriously as it
should. It was a Domestic 9/11, and articles like yesterday's 5 ways
to clean up the mess might need a little more toughness, like taking
a German approach to hate speech and fake news (making them jailable
offenses), and mad gods like Musk, Bezos, etc. who haven't the basic
inkling of martian geodynamics (no magnetosphere [solar wind would
rip an atmosphere off] and maximum .34 atmosphere density) - No
planet B discourse is spot on.

I for one loved Don't Look Up.  I also loved the criticisms that it
"wasn't fun enough", which was just Inception-esque. Bravo to
DeCaprio for being brave enough for invoking Network's "I'm mad as
hell, and I'm not going to take it anymore" speeches are a real
application of the trope. Also, the lunatic billionaire and the
"acceptable risk" of 40-odd percent of people not surviving in the
Ark (sorry, spoilers), shows Musk's utter madness in his recent
tweet that he's willing to coup any country not willing to give him
lithium.

Not to mention that few are talking about the Twaites Ice Sheet in
Antarctica, which, _when_ it goes, will raise global seas by 10
feet.

Sorry to be a downer (the American way of eternal "awesomeness"
being thrown to the side a minute), but while I enjoyed Biden's
speech,  I thought he should have gone Network, and walked up to the
camera lens and told America to get it together or else we risk
everything.

But in the end, America has become amazingly irrelevant after Trump.
I mean, the Dubai Expo has its pageants about incredibly
unsustainable futures. I hope the world can clean up our mess for
us.

Yikes.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #97 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Fri 7 Jan 22 05:52

    
Regarding Wired (with best respects to Bruce, who I hope I can
consider at least a collegial breakfast partner)

I was a columnist for Artbyte Magazine (as part of the activist
collective RTMark) and editor of Intelligent Agent at the Whitney
for 10 years, as well as part of the cometary clouds of 21C and
Mondo 2000, which I regret fell to Wired. I also got to know Jon a
little through Fringeware Review, back in the day. Bravo to Mark
Frauenfelder, Cory Doctorow, and so on for keeping their stuff
running. There's a point to this.

Wired and boingBOING.com are generally the survivors, which is
great.   I also read WIRED and MIT Technology Review, and I'm
grateful for Bruce's stalwart contributions, which I feel constitute
a lot of the "heart" of that magazine. WIRED has also had great
interviews with thinkers like Paul Virilio and introduced concepts
like "The Long Tail" which I find immensely useful to this day.

This issue that I have with Wired, and I hope this does not fall on
dead ears, is that likely in wanting to satisfy CondeNast, there has
been a lot of the "VC/CEO of the month club" or the "Isn't this
cool, and we really aren't thinking about how this will cause the
digging up of Cameroon" articles.  I realize I might be too
critical, but I have to swallow WIRED's corporate reprinting of tech
press releases along with the incisive bits. I look at it like
Playboy, I read it for the cultural articles.

But in the Meta hypercapital age is there a place for a cultural
magazine dealing with tech, or are Hyperallergic, boingBOING, and so
on the places for this?  Or, in the age of plutocratic nation-states
and oligarchic platforms, is culture stripped of a voice unless it
bows to the Stacks?

With diversity and equity being a key conversation, what about
cultural equity? Even though the exhibition I curated last month
featured largely privileged artists, I intentionally included a few
non-western emerging artists, and we need to not always worry about
the behemoths. 

As I can ramble, I'll summarize. I appreciate bruce's repost of the
WIRED editorial mission, and I get it. Personally, I think that
there is a world involving technology that is far, far cooler than
what they publish, and thanks again to Bruce for being part of that.
But Wired might be more interesting if it had an article or two of
the Mondo vein (Updated, as we are not in the Tragically Hip '90s of
the Johnny Mnemonic MTV Amp or Matrix era).

I swear that I will make a few posts that are not screeds, but this
conversation seems to be pussyfooting around far too much.  I wish
Barlow was still alive to jump in, but he'd be far more nuanced. 
I'm swinging a baseball bat, if only to break some ice.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #98 of 420: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Fri 7 Jan 22 06:49

    
Any truth to the story that the revolt in Kazakhstan is due to
bitcoin mining there using so much energy that prices rose?
Looks like it's true that Kazakhstan does 18% of all bitcoin
mining, and that the revolt started over energy prices, but
connecting those two dots is more iffy.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #99 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 06:57

    
Screeds are welcome here, Pat, and you're probably right that we're
pussyfooting around. And perhaps hoping/expecting for some authority
or other to fix the world so that it's suddenly better again, vs the
brutality we see in the daily infotainment reports.

I just read an E.O. Wilson quote, saying that we have “Paleolithic
emotions, medieval institutions and god-like technology.” h/t Prem
Chandavarkar via Nettime.

We see politicians du jour leveraging angry and brutal emotions,
emotions they've manipulated into being, like small children playing
with sticks of dynamite. We saw an explosion on January 6, 2021, and
since then some have pretended that the deadly dynamite was a mere
fireworks show for the tourists.

I don't know what Barlow would do, exactly, but we have to do it
without him. In fact, we have a dearth of great souls to guide us
from the brink; I keep looking... and hoping... for cooler heads to
combine with the kind of toughness it will take to prevail over the
chaos and misery of the moment.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #100 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Fri 7 Jan 22 07:35

    
Re:
"Any truth to the story that the revolt in Kazakhstan is due to
bitcoin mining there using so much energy that prices rose?"

it's a pretense.

If anything, sparks to the tinder. Kazakj=hstan has been fighting
oppressive regimes for a long time. No one is telling the real
story, possibly due to petropolitics, as Kazakhstan is a petropower.

And there's a general helplessness in light of nation-state
platforms, mad Westphalian dinosaurs panicking about their
irrelevance,and godlike oligarchs.  Mammon rules these days, while
Rome burns. As someone who has been involved with The Yes Men,
resistance is essential, but even the Facebook Papers didn't seem to
dent that behemoth. My take is that there is a possibility of the
beasts to collapse under their own weight.

We'll try to fix things when they look too broken, but the question
is whether it'll be too late or not.

BTW, Musk is just a mad god. Mars is not terraformable, and cobalt, 
lithium, and tantalum already are subjects for war. He's a rich
autistic convinced with his own genius.

HOWEVER, I do like discussions about green hydrogen and using
gravity as a battery system for hydrogeneration. super interesting.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #101 of 420: Michael Bravo (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 07:36

    
Via email from Michael Bravo:

on the topic of the Kazakhstan events, it is being more and more
likely that we're seeing bulldogs under the carpet. Namely, initial
peaceful protests have been coopted to promote and execute
inter-clan wars in Kazakh power circles; it has escalated to first
fase flag riots using less educated  and more indoctrinated parts of
the populace, and even felons, and then Russian troops being invited
to quell unrest, which has additionally and quite irrevocably
tainted the whole thing even more. There's a multitude of ways it
can blow up badly, and almost none that I can see that could end up
somehow positive.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #102 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 07:38

    <scribbled by jonl Fri 7 Jan 22 07:38>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #103 of 420: fruitbatpangolin (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 07:39

    
Via email from 'fruitbatpangolin':

"I am a man of principles! And if you don't like my principles,
don't worry, I have others."
- Groucho Marx

Given that walking Denis Leary satires (reference media:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UrgpZ0fUixs), have been deliberately
'weaponising aspies' online as an ongoing project of performative
cruelty masquerading as wit, since before 4chan first mestacized,
may I humbly suggest that unless we can here statistically control
for these and other such background levels of social grimness
generated by far larger cohorts of the population, then this attempt
at pop psychiatric epidemiology may in fact be of about the same
amount of use within actual public health and safety policy as the
whimisical opium addled musings of an aristocratic 19th century
caliper fanatic.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #104 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Fri 7 Jan 22 08:21

    
On the WIRED reform:

Yesterday's solutions (coal, oil, natural gas) are today's problems.

Before that horses (specifically horse crap in cities) was the
problem: London was drowning in the stuff and it all looked
completely insoluble.

So getting on top of that cycle - figuring out the downsides first,
smart regulation etc. is a Noble Goal. You can see the current
vaccine shenanigans as a lot of people with excellent reasons to
distrust government (consider how bad they are on global warming,
never mind Iraq and Afghanistan) distrusting government medical
advice and the total immunity from lawsuits which the vaccine
companies have obtained: distrust of technology, distrust of
authority.

We can say "but the vaccines work" and, sure, they do - but if there
were massive problems down the line it's not like you can sue. How
can anybody be expected to blindly trust government under these
circumstances?

So imagine our Problem Solving WIRED grasping the vaccine nettle:
big front cover pieces assessing the vaccine options and evidence,
interviews with scientists/lawyers/ethicists, independent assessment
of claims of large scale vaccine problems and so on... 

https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Awired.com+mrna&rlz=1C5CHFA_enGB943GB943
&oq=site%3Awired.com+mrna&aqs=chrome..69i57j69i58.3470j0j9&sourceid=chrome&ie=
UTF-8

I'd say the coverage isn't far from there. Maybe not quite so much
"vaccine consumer reports" but a pretty decent general sense of
critical technology analysis.

I guess what I'm saying is "I don't see why WIRED couldn't make this
turn" and a lot of the stuff coming out of Science and Technology
Studies (Bruno Latour and that mob) might provide the critical
frameworks for actually making a go of WIRED becoming a friendly
critic (or a critical friend) rather than the somewhat gauche
relationship it had with the future back in the day.

MONDO2000 shout out here.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #105 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 08:48

    
Most of us think we have a sense of what's happening in the world.
We might follow various news sources and think we're well-informed. 
But by now those news sources are all suspect, we don't really know
what's happening. Who do you trust? There's no authority for truth.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #106 of 420: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Fri 7 Jan 22 09:00

    
Anyway, whether or not bitcoin mining caused the Kazakhstan revolt,
that 18% of the mining power is offline right now.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #107 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Fri 7 Jan 22 09:08

    
I triangulate, or quadrangluate.
CNN - BBC - NHK - Al Jazeera - PBS

Look for agreement or correlations. If something smells fishy, it
probably is. Check Snopes.  For things in authoritarian regions like
Kazakhstan or Iran, I can put you in contact with people on the
ground.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #108 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 7 Jan 22 09:29

    
I think good reporting requires actually being curious about the
details and in a world of shallow opinion pieces it does stand out.
Too many stories tell you how to feel and leave you wondering if
they got their facts right.

While my own curiosity often has limits, I am on team curiosity.
Without it we just end up shallow discussions, like when people who
don't know very much cryptocurrency or whatever go on about how
terrible it is and get basic things wrong. This shallow conversation
is happening all over, repeatedly, in many forums, and it's boring.
Interesting critics (and advocates) did their homework.

Geeking out about the details has problems too, though, because it
breaks conversational norms - I don't want to see this conversation
turn into some technical conversation about various algorithmic
details of specific cryptocurrencies that only insiders care about.

So probably the best thing to do is to find and share interesting
facts of broader interest, with sources.

(I agree with the idea of checking multiple sources. Before sharing
an interesting news article, I will do a Google news search to see
if there is a better article.)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #109 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 7 Jan 22 09:40

    
Looks like Signal is still trying to make MobileCoin a thing, though
you can't buy it in the US.
<https://www.wired.com/story/signal-mobilecoin-cryptocurrency-payments/>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #110 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 10:00

    <scribbled by jonl Fri 7 Jan 22 10:00>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #111 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 10:01

    
(Sorry for the scribble, it's the only way to correct a typo on the
WELL, where you can't edit a post once it's done.)

A new culture is emerging, and I'm not sure what to make of it.
Something called (by Eric Weinstein, possibly as a joke) the
"Intellectual Dark Web" started emerging around 2018 as a loose
group of figures consistent in their concern about identity
politics, political correctness, and so-called "cancel culture." It
appeared to me that they were more critical of the left than the
right, but not necessarily because they aligned with the right. I
suppose they were disaffected liberals, concerned about what they
say as authoritarianism within the progressive movement.

Around these same conversations were folks who were talking about
"sensemaking" and various kinds of philosophical theory. Joe
Lightfoot recently published a list of media platforms that he
characterized as "the liminal web":
<https://www.joelightfoot.org/post/the-liminal-web-mapping-an-emergent-subcultu
re-of-sensemakers-meta-theorists-systems-poets> He says "the Liminal Web is made up of a collection of individuals who often have a long history of feeling as if they don’t wholly belong in any particularly scene or space, as such they tend to hold onto any sense of group identification quite lightly." He defines it as "a collection of thinkers, writers, theorists, podcasters, videographers and community builders who all share a high crossover in their collection of perspectives on the world." 

I'm flittering around the edges of these conversations, and don't
pretend to have a clear sense of their scope - but Lightfoot does a
pretty good job in the piece I've linked providing an overview the
projects, platforms, questions and challenges emerging from this
space, and the sometimes vague connections betwee them. 

One observation I would make: from what I can see, the folks
associated within this loose cluster come from the apparently
disappearing American white middle class. They seem to be aware that
we're in a moment of crisis, and they're trying to make sense of it.
I was in a recent talked that mentioned the idea of "a religion that
is not a religion" (apparently an idea from John Vervaeke). 

Also in the mix: the idea of Web3 (not exactly the same as Web 3.0),
which is related to blockchain, cryptocurrency, decentralized
finance (DeFi), and decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs). A
decentralized web enabled by blockchain technology. 

I have more questions than answers, but I thought I'd bring all this
into the conversation. Like <bslesins>, I'm on team curiosity.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #112 of 420: Axon (axon) Fri 7 Jan 22 10:29

    
When I say "incels", I mean it as a synonym for "toxic misogynists",
which is their brand equity. As someone residing comfortably on the
functional bandwidth of the spectrum, I reject wholesale the notion
that mocking incels is hostile to neurodivergents as a class. Toxic
misogyny deserves no such fig leaf.

And while I cannot assess all of the people involved in
cryptocurrency, the ones humping my leg to speculate thus fully
validate their reputation for being unfuckable.

Just for clarification. Please do carry on.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #113 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Fri 7 Jan 22 10:30

    
always cranky:

- have thot for years because of the way everything has blurred into
everything but there is no joan didion anywhere, i dont necessarily
understand what a 'wired' story would be as opposed to something
that might get published elsewhere. 

- reality check: beloved suck.com truly gone. it had a
mirror/archive site for awhile but that's now gone too. its best
days predated the internet archive so suck is truly lost. it really
mattered in so many ways — and as i used to keep yelping about,
bitrot is real…

- as for barlow, sheesh. he was so wrong about so many things — but
i know people miss his gift of gab.

- as <jonl> knows, am working with a friend on hindsight institute
(she's dealing with mom in hospice so we wont get back to it in
awhile)..

https://www.prabapilar.com/hindsightinstitute

with another friend we are planning to do a fakenews/parody
metaverse business association website, with similar intent as HI.
however said friend has a different background than praba (she has
all the art/theory background). his background was as
futurist/software engineer/market researcher/advertising exec) so it
will of necessity have a different tone/look/feel than HI.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #114 of 420: fruitbatpangolin (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 10:33

    
Followup from fruitbatpangolin:

Besides, even if we ignore the social epidemeology/asshole cohort
statistical issues, on first take any significant numbers of autists
going off on crazy killing sprees because of their desperate need to
fit in with the volksgeist, would seem on the face of it maybe the
basis for a darkly sardonic farce written by Trey Parker or
something, rather than an actual likely challenge of the modern age.
Hell, give em all time machines with which to hunt down a robot Hans
Asperger, while we are all busy Hollywoodising stuff. Go nuts.

And, I'm no brainologist, however I am an inveterate gambler, so
given the circumstances and the festive season, I am very much
willing to make a polite bet that maybe, just maybe, most of these
people's primary/most serious psychological diagnoses may, and I
know this sounds absolutely crazy, right, but it might possibly not
be autism. Even if these people were technically somewhere on the
spectrum in DSM-V. Or even the ZX81.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #115 of 420: fruitbatpangolin (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 10:34

    
More from fruitbatpangolin:

...in reply to the problem about suspect news sources in our brave
new mediaverse;

Perhaps you can still trust that which you can reliably still
measure.

Once you start looking, there are lots of useful metrics. For
instance, reporters are a pretty tight bunch, so it is hard for
published ones to just vanish without other reporters noticing,
therefore one reliable figure you can still broadly trust in this
day and age, is the current measured height of the pile of dead
investigative journalists, within a given geographic region. Say, to
give a rough measure of the trustworthyness of any public
information kiosks you may encounter, or the likely reliability of
local hotel reviews and taxi companies, that kind of thing.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #116 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Fri 7 Jan 22 11:38

    
(interesting slippage)

> This shallow conversation
> is happening all over, repeatedly, in many forums, and it's boring.

But it's also so very human. It seems that Gideon Lichfield began his
WIRED article with his hyperbolic statement about "the blockchain"
simply to illustrate the need for his main point:

   "To me, the answer begins with rejecting the binary."

(which is also a deliciously binary thing to say). And, true to our
nature, we missed the point and engaged with the topic that's become
today's poster-child of the non-terminating conversation (*so* much
more interesting than the old "tabs vs spaces" rants of yesteryear!)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #117 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 7 Jan 22 11:55

    
Well, Bitcoin may have crashed Kazakhstan, but it looks even more
likely that Kazakhstan has crashed Bitcoin for a while.

That's because Kazakhstan is full of coal-powered Bitcoin factories
that China kicked over its border.  I don't see any evidence that
any of these Kazakh Bitcoin farms have come to physical harm, but
there's nothing more jumpy and bipolar than a cryptocoin bro. 
They're in the toilet, but they'll clamber out.

It's not looking pretty in Kazakhstan.   The current honcho declared
a state of emergency, said the rioters are criminals and murderers,
and gave shoot-to-kill permission to the armed forces.

In the meantime, some ragtag masked youth in social media have
declared themselves to be "the Kazakh Liberation Front" and
brandished arms at the camera.  I dunno -- maybe the Russians will
promptly restore order, like they did in Afghanistan, Syria,
Libya...  They did pacify Chechnya, sort of, or the rubble of it,
anyway.

It's the kind of situation that could be over and forgotten in a
week or could fester for ten years.  The Curse of Oil is notorious,
but the curse of coal-powered crypto is a new one.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #118 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 7 Jan 22 11:57

    
I'm getting most of my Kazakh rumors from people on Twitter who have
been commenting on the Ukrainian war, and operations other than war,
ever since th Euromaidan back in 2013.

At first, that was just a "spontaneous urban uprising," too.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #119 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 12:25

    
From John Robb on Twitter (@johnrobb):

When Kazakhstan's dictator shut down the Internet to halt protests,
"a full 12% of Bitcoin's worldwide computational power vanished"

Rampant corruption + cheap energy + Internet connectivity = Bitcoin
mining
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #120 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 12:26

    
This was the link that accompanied that post by John Robb:
<https://t.co/8P3Vytr0BU>

A piece from Fortune magazine, "Kazakhstan internet shutdown sheds
light on a big Bitcoin mining mystery"
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #121 of 420: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Fri 7 Jan 22 13:13

    


i just want to comment that it's nice to see so many Mondo 2000 shoutouts.
(marginal Mondo contributor/model myself...) Ken/rusirius had a serious
medical event recently. if you'd like to join a Well tradition that sounds
kinda woo woo, you can send him "beams" for healing and wellness. 

i miss barlow, but see <loris>/Paulina Borsook's point. if JPB were alive,
i'm not convinced he'd be helping us make sense of a world in which our
collective failure to act with decency and responsibility, for decades,
just may kill us all.

also, <axon>'s #112 is kinda magnificent.

that said: demonizing any group that has built itself around a
self-demonizing ideology (or is it just a self-demonizing brand?) isn't
going to change that group of people. so maybe the author of the article
posted way back, the one about "the community" of allegedly ASD spectrum
incels, does have a few salient points to make. note: i didn't tl;dr. i
read the whole thing.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #122 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Fri 7 Jan 22 15:11

    
tying together a few themes, c19 and monopolies:

moderna and pfizer have a lock on the US vax market. yet there were
vaxes being developed in italy and cuba that sounded interesting;
and am particularly interested in novavax and one developed out of a
texas hospital. these rely on a different older vax technology  and
are being used in various non-US locales. but will these ever make
it to the US market? i ask out of enlightened self-interest: my
@#%^*( immune system suggested i wouldnt do well with the
pfizer/moderna vaxes — but could probably better tolerate the more
old—school vaxes. but i am doubting that i'll ever get the chance to
try any of them out.

and oh, an incoming airbnb guest is a last-quarter computer science
undergrad at uc-santa cruz — who is from kazakhstan. i am dying to
ask how he + his family ended up here, with he and his sister
attending various UCs (his sister is at berkeley) — but dare i? he
just arrived back in the US about a week ago — don't know if he'd
feel safe talking me to about his homeland. 

as for barlow, the antipathy between me + him was long established
so i wont pretend i miss his take on things. i dont wish suffering
on living beings or those who have passed beyond. that being said,
cant say anyone comes to mind who might be called inspirational. all
i know/can suggest is to work locally — as ms. tiff has done — and
for now maybe that is the best we can do.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #123 of 420: Alan Fletcher : Factual accounts are occluded by excess of interpretation (af) Fri 7 Jan 22 15:28

    
Novavax announced good Phase 3 trial results in December.
<https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2116185>
Might submit to the FDA soon. 

Its big advantage is that it has a long shelf life at regular
refrigerator temperatures. "The technology is the same as that used
in the Flublok influenza vaccine, and is similar to other vaccines
that have been around for a long time, like the hepatitis B
vaccine."

(The well has a dedicated <covid19.> conference, linking topics from
other conferences.)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #124 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Fri 7 Jan 22 15:55

    
right, have been tracking the good news about novavax.  just hoping
-market conditions- lead it to being widely avail in the US.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #125 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 7 Jan 22 16:21

    
I read through the Liminal Web article from <111> and was a bit
surprised that none of the names were familiar to me. Perhaps I’m
showing limited curiosity here, but does anyone have recommendations
for interesting reading? I don’t want to pick at random.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #126 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 22 16:24

    
Some of the action there is on YouTube or via podcast, e.g. Rebel
Wisdom and The Stoa. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #127 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Fri 7 Jan 22 17:11

    
liminal web/erik davis/doug rushkoff/happy mutant --- right, got it.
at least it's not like eve babitz, who evidently ended her days
listening to right-wing podcasts.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #128 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Fri 7 Jan 22 18:43

    
Interesting that amid the state of the world in terms of the
climate, biodiversity, democracy, and concentration of wealth, amid
other indicators, cryptocurrency and blockchain are the rabbit holes
we’ve largely gone down here for the past couple days.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #129 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Fri 7 Jan 22 18:54

    
because some ppl -like- talking about crypto? it's fun for them to
consider? rather than the intractable probs we dont know what to do
about?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #130 of 420: Gary Gach (ggg) Fri 7 Jan 22 19:27

    
#130 - A random aperçu … completely aside from anything but the
state of the world … this year has witnessed a phenomenon called
"immersive art" in San Francisco & NYC. Au contraire, rather than
delivering a sense of spaciousness - of being enveloped – 3D – the
effect is a flattening – a destruction of depth – as if translating
Van Gogh, Michelangelo, Picasso to the psychological width of a
screen, a monitor. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #131 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 7 Jan 22 23:43

    
I'm wondering what interesting art people found in the last pandemic
year. Not that people are getting out or travelling much, but there
ought to be some on the Internet somewhere?

I don't really expect anyone else to be interested, but I've become
somewhat obsessed with Polish revival of interwar era music. Here's
a good intro:

<https://culture.pl/en/article/interwar-music-revivalists-the-bands-singers-pla
ying-polish-music-of-the-1920s-1930s>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #132 of 420: Inky fingers (ianb) Sat 8 Jan 22 00:35

    
This is probably the best piece I've seen about why the
"decentralised" dream of Web3 is not going to happen. In fact, it's
already dead -- at least for ordinary users. 

https://moxie.org/2022/01/07/web3-first-impressions.html
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #133 of 420: Michael D. Sullivan (avogadro) Sat 8 Jan 22 00:54

    
Can someone tell me what the f*ck Web3 means (and why I should care
about it), without referring directly or indirectly to NFTs or VR,
both of which exist without Web3 (I had the Google Cardboard viewer
years ago and gave it up almost immediately because it was stupid)
and largely or completely deserve to be canceled.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #134 of 420: Inky fingers (ianb) Sat 8 Jan 22 03:56

    
Oh boy. I can have a go. Basically: the idea is to decentralise the
web using blockchains to effectively replace databases, but it's a
hazy concept. Key parts of it including decentralised finances (the
use of cryptocurrencies not controlled by banks or governments), the
creation of tokens of various kinds to denote ownership, and
decentralised autonomous organisations (DAOs), which are
organisations where governance rules are encoded programmatically
(again on the blockchain). 

Some of it is interesting - I think DAOs are fascinating, although
the early use of them is awful thanks to libertarian concepts of
greater financial investment = greater democratic rights (some DAOs
give more power to individuals based on how much they put in).

Others are just worse technical solutions to existing problems:
there is nothing that a blockchain can do that's not more
effeciently done by a database is one of the common criticisms (and
I've yet to find examples that prove that statement false). 

I think the name does it no favours. It's not Web3 - it's not really
the web - and it's not a replacement for the web. It's something
else, some bits interesting and some just the dreadful recreation of
monetary power structures in code.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #135 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 06:16

    
In a recent presentation about Liminal Web and Web3 by Jared Lucas
via Stoa (viewable at <https://youtu.be/JfoHPq19Oog>), I took some
notes, including definitions:

Liminal Web: thinkers
Web3: Doers

Web1: Read
Web2: Read Write
Web3: Read Write Own

DeFi - Decentralized Finance. You can do most financial stuff faster
and without a third party, not routed through a centralized system.

NFTs - Fungible goods are things like grain, oil, water. NonFungible
- things like baseball cards, art, music.

Fungible tokens: Bitcoin etc.
NonFungible tokens: Bored Ape Yacht Club, Cryptopunks. An NFT is a
unique digital asset.

DAO: decentralized autonomous organization. Shared cap table and
bank account. Cap table is a share in ownership.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #136 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 06:29

    
We've been hearing that the blockchain concept is worldchanging
since 2008, but so far the most obvious implementations have been
currencies, and those currencies have worked more as speculative
investments than as a actual media for exchange. So
blockchain/crypto/web3 might be relevant as concepts that eventually
will change everything, or they might be manifestations of a
conceptual fad that will eventually fade. I do know that there's
more and more buzz, more and more evident activity. I keep hearing
that DAOs exist, but I've never been part of one. I know that NFTs
exist - and Vinay was a pioneer with those instruments - but they
seem to be a speculative investment, so I'm not sure I would call
them worldchanging. I definitely defer to Vinay on that one.

Wikipedia has a list of supposed use cases for blockchain
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain#Uses>:

Cryptocurrencies
Smart contracts
Financial services
Games
Energy trading
Supply chain
Anti-counterfeiting
Healthcare
Domain names

If blockchain truly becomes the way we do all of those things, the
technology will become fairly pervasive. 

That same Wikipedia article explains what blockchain is,
structurally <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain#Structure>:

"A blockchain is a decentralized, distributed, and oftentimes
public, digital ledger consisting of records called blocks that is
used to record transactions across many computers so that any
involved block cannot be altered retroactively, without the
alteration of all subsequent blocks. This allows the participants to
verify and audit transactions independently and relatively
inexpensively. A blockchain database is managed autonomously using a
peer-to-peer network and a distributed timestamping server. They are
authenticated by mass collaboration powered by collective
self-interests. Such a design facilitates robust workflow where
participants' uncertainty regarding data security is marginal. The
use of a blockchain removes the characteristic of infinite
reproducibility from a digital asset. It confirms that each unit of
value was transferred only once, solving the long-standing problem
of double spending. A blockchain has been described as a
value-exchange protocol. A blockchain can maintain title rights
because, when properly set up to detail the exchange agreement, it
provides a record that compels offer and acceptance."

Blockchain will not fix climate change; in fact, might be making it
worse.
<https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/15/22328203/nft-cryptoart-ethereum-blockchain-
climate-change>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #137 of 420: Paul Harrison (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 06:30

    
Via email from Paul Harrison:

I am enjoying the current State of the World discussion as always,
although this one seems to have taken a few odd turns. I'd like to
raise a lighter topic:


Speaking of rabbit holes, maybe we could talk about what Japan has
been up to with commoditized motion-capture. Hololive seems
perfectly adapted to the current state of the world, but building on
a history of technologies such as Vocaloid and MikuMikuDance and a
creative culture that completely blurs online, offline, real and
synthetic, such as the odottemita posted on Nico Nico. An animated
dance routine might be copied by a real dancer, or a real dancer
copied by a live-streamed motion capture performance, or an animated
wrestling move copied by a real pro-wrestler leading to a weird
collaboration. The technology and the casual ease with which it is
used seems to have advanced in a series of leaps in the last year.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #138 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 06:33

    
Shebar Windstone sent an email reporting that the video referenced
in <35> has been taken down: "This video is no longer available due
to a copyright claim by Walmart."  The video showed a Walmart VR
application. I'm hiding that post.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #139 of 420: fruitbatpangolin (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 06:36

    
Via email from fruitbatpangolin:

Been lots of flattening depths recently. I watched the news about
Lytton in Canada burning to the ground last June
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lytton_wildfire> and idly wondered
how long it might be before a large unprepared temperate metropolis
like London gets to experience sitting near 50 degrees Celcius for
half a week or so. London is nearly on the same latitude as Lytton.
Could be later this year.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #140 of 420: fruitbatpangolin (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 06:36

    
Via email from fruitbatpangolin:

Sidney Poitier just died.

Everyone, just stop whatever you are doing and go and rewatch
Sneakers, out of reverence. It will only take a couple of hours,
then we can go all back to bitching about crypto.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #141 of 420: fruitbatpangolin (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 06:38

    
Via email from fruitbatpangolin:

<avogadro>, I'll see if I can help at all -

Web3 is the fully buzzword compatible howling existential
Lovecraftean void rent in the very fabric of the global network
topology, which emerged in a freak abiogenetic spawning following
the fabled usable release candidate of Project Xanadu becoming
forever trapped in a frozen Platonic idyll of eternally perfect
vapourware, which also released some Supermen baddies.

On a related note, I suspect that the last time we wasted this much
of humanity's available mathematical resources on the double spend
problem for a monetary protocol, was back when we thought it was a
good wheeze to employ Issac Newton to find and execute coin clippers
for the Royal Mint.

And while this seems wasteful in this modern enlightened age, as a
solution to that problem, it still only scales marginally worse than
most of the crypto tokens currently on offer today.

For added comedy points, I also just went zietgeist fishing on
twitter and it seems that this has been happening -

<https://twitter.com/cat5749/status/1476813266462539779>

Also this -

<https://twitter.com/Charlie_Pyle/status/1479274941484699649>

And will somebody please go check on Marc Andreessen, he looks to
have snowcrashed and may need rebooting.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #142 of 420: Albert Cottica (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 06:39

    
Via email from Albert Cottica:

Greetings and many thanks for your interesting thoughts to all at
SOTW2022 (and hello Tex, hello Bruce, hello Vinay, happy 2022!)

I am interested in the interplay between COVID response and risks
for privacy and civil liberties. In 2020, most of the people in my
extended network were worried about a second pandemic, one of
surveillance. We agreed that this was a huge issue, and in
particular claimed that immunity passports were an unworkable idea,
as they would turn into "a civil liberties nightmare"
(https://edgeryders.eu/t/a-surveillance-pandemic-results-of-the-community-liste
ning-post-on-risks-for-freedom-in-the-wake-of-covid-19/13183). In 2021, though, I have been using my own immunity passport daily, showing a QR code to get into the gym or a restaurant, with surprisingly little pushback. Just what happened there? Have we been pessimistic? Or have we been right, and the nightmare is alive and well but out of our sight? Do you have any comment on that?

Keep up the good work,
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #143 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 07:35

    
Ah crap. Ok, so <rips off shirt to reveal super suit> I did a lot of
the early comms and project managed the launch of the Ethereum
project. A lot of these concepts like Web3 come out of the period
when the Ethereum team were discussing how to communicate what we
had done.

Note: I divested in 2016 so I am not a multi-millionaire unlike all
of my cofounders. I feared the wrath of the SEC, and the SEc turned
out not to have any wrath at all. At which point... <shrugs> not the
first fortune I've missed out on.

I will now proceed to assign homework.

https://vimeo.com/161183966 is a talk I did about five years ago
which explains *what is happening* with blockchain at a fundamental
sociotechnical level. This is before tokens, this is before ICOs,
this is before there was any real money in the field. This is the
definitive *what this technology will do to our society* talk, from
before the ponzi scheme people arrived.

The basic story:

first databases lived alone - isolated inside of organizations 

then databases were networked between organizations using APIs, but
peer-to-peer collaboration through APIs is *extremely* difficult as
the number of collaborators scales. This is the N SQUARED problem:
50 computers in fifty companies trying to talk to each other
peer-to-peer needs 2500 successful technical integrations. The
amount of human labour involved is serious. At 100 computers, it's
10000 connections. At 200, four times that again. Large scale
machine-to-machine collaboration is impossible except for very
simple protocols.

What do we get instead? Hub-and-spoke monopolies: you connect to
Square or VISA or Intuit, and they connect to everything else for
you. You need one technical integration: "my software talks to
Google, Google talks to everything else". Hub and spoke concentrates
power in the hub.

This N SQUARED problem is utterly fundamental. If you don't
understand it, reread what I said, ask me questions, whatever it
takes. But until it *clicks* and you realize that peer-to-peer is
*impossible* because of the complexity growing as (at least) the
square of the number of diverse systems being integrated, the need
for blockchain will not make sense to you. You must get clarity
about this critical point before forming an opinion about Web3.

Now, those hub-and-spoke service providers? That's the
wealth-concentrating megamoghuls of Silicon Valley. 

Why does Facebook exist? RSS readers failed, so rather than having
everybody with their own blog, and I have my feed reader which does
not insert advertising and I pay for my own compute and bandwidth,
we have the entire social graph of an entire society owned by a
private entity.

Why does RSS fail? Different blog software outputs different RSS
feeds. Different readers may fail to render some feeds, some times.
"Oh, right-to-left unicode characters on wordpress 1.5.2 break font
rendering in FeedStorm, but only on MacOS 8.3 and above." That's a
classic N SQUARED problem: five dozen RSS-emitting blogging
platforms, five dozen feed readers on five different platforms, and
the software complexity just got more and more tangled. The system
because hard to use, understand, and (critically) expensive to
maintain.

FB comes along and is basically "right then" and has one piece of
blogging software and one RSS reader which it controls, and that's
it: you connect to FB, FB connects you to everything else.

This pattern replicates **EVERYWHERE** once you can see it: gmail,
sure, ate decentralized email. VISA ate decentralized bank card
settlements.

Over and over again, the technical complexity of keeping things
peer-to-peer rises as the peer to peer networks scale. So you get
great little subcultures of peer to peer innovation, then they
scale, then the N SQUARED problem makes them too expensive to
maintain, then a monopolist comes in and eats the P2P network and
replaced it with a hub-and-spoke monopoly which winds up owning the
entire "connectedness infrastructure" of whatever it is they just
ate.

Blockchain is the solution to this problem *for exquisitely fiddly
technical reasons which are almost never discussed in the press
because almost nobody understands them.

I will explain in the next part what that solution is, and why it
actually works. But, first, please watch the video I linked. If you
want to understand Web3 *properly* start there.

I did not coin the term, but I certainly created much of its
meaning. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #144 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 07:40

    
On the incels thing: many, many of the incels self-identify as being
on the autism spectrum. We should probably believe them.

"many incels have aspergers" does *not* imply "many people who have
aspergers are incels."

I don't think we can ignore their self-reports and get any kind of
real understanding of what is fuelling incel domestic terrorism. And
that's what it is: it's domestic *terrorism*, not just spree
shootings. I'm looking at this as a national security issue: "incel
9/11" is not impossible to imagine, but if we don't understand why
they are killing people, it becomes much harder to stop them.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #145 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 07:40

    
"always listen very carefully and analytically to what your enemies
tell you about themselves and how they see the world."
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #146 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 07:42

    
2015 Ethereum propaganda - I was in the room when we made this
video, I seem to remember editing the script and talking to the
design team quite a bit.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j23HnORQXvs

This is what we thought we were doing. This is what Web3 grew from.
This is where it all started.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #147 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 07:45

    
I mean, look at this adorable little munchkin :-)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TDGq4aeevgY

You have to go back to the source material! Don't read the garbage
churned out by the ponzi merchants. Go back to the original team -
Vitalik, Gavin Wood, Joe Lubin were the big thought leaders - and
look at how they were communicating about Ethereum *when we built
it*.

The carpetbaggers contribute nothing but noise. It's like asking
snake handling evangelical preachers the true meaning of the
Resurrection.

They'll tell you that they're Christians, but you should not take
what they say as Gospel Truth.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #148 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 07:54

    
Wow, thanks for <143>, Vinay. I didn't get that before, and I
probably should have. I spent some time in the early 2000s working
for a company that marketed a translation hub for diverse services.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #149 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 8 Jan 22 08:56

    
Yes, thanks Vinay. But am I wrong in remembering that "Web 3.0" predates
the emergence of bitcoin in the public eye?

One of the important lessons here may be the fact that the very words
we use to explain our thoughts are, in fact, changed with each retelling.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #150 of 420: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Sat 8 Jan 22 09:00

    
Berkeley proposed using a blockchain thingy for small-scale
bond sales, and they're getting some pushback. Bare blockchain
is not necessarily planet-wrecking like bitcoin, but for an
inherently centralized application like one city's bond sales
it's not any more useful than a regular old database. Or, given
the likely transaction rate, a ledger book.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #151 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 09:03

    
Right. Part two of #143 - how blockchain fixes all this.

Here, we have to bow to the genius of Satoshi. Something very clever
was done.

Three basic technologies:

* distributed hash tables (DHTs)
* hashcash
* public key cryptography 

I'll explain each in order, starting with the DHT.

The DHT is the unsung hero of bittorrent etc. It's a simple enough
idea - after somebody else has it! Also the devil is in the
(implementation) details.

So let's break that down.

A hash table is a super common data structure in most modern
computer languages. It's a way of storing *whatever you want* in an
easy to access way. Pseudocode:

store_data (key, value) -> stuff gets stored in the hash table.
get_data (key) -> stuff is pulled out of the hash table and given
back to you

the key ("dogfood") and the value ("2 pounds of kibble and a nice
little piece of fish") can be semantic. But they can also be
programmatic. Hash functions are complicated, particularly
cryptographic hash functions, and I do recommend doing some reading
about them - they're going to show up again when we get to bitcoin
mining.

so more psudocode

store_data( hash (value), value)

so now the object being stored is *named* as the hash of its value.
So you take a 6mb JPEG, and you have an automatically generated name
like a30934b7d3ca70d482745c3a7c6b9e289f73d127. Looks random, but the
same file will always generate the same hash.

So now in your "little" storage system, you store
a30934b7d3ca70d482745c3a7c6b9e289f73d127 - that's going in memory.
But the 6mb JPEG could now be stored on disk - or on the network.

Key concept here: the hash function lets you store a unique name for
a piece of data. Anybody who has that data can recognize your
request for that data by the unique name, and if you change the data
by even one bit, the name breaks and no confusion can occur (except
for hash collisions, which we'll come back to when we get to bitcoin
mining.)

So the distributed hash table is a networked implementation of a
hash table.

Imagine 16 computers in a perfectly reliable network. A file comes
in to the cluster for storage:
a30934b7d3ca70d482745c3a7c6b9e289f73d127. It starts with an A, so
the data is sent to machine A to store. Next file comes in, and it's
e2968a25409736660cf2e638cadbf234259fda63 - send that to machine E,
and so on.

If you need 256 computers, it's now "store on machine A3" or "store
on machine E2" and so on. You can get as big an array of machines as
necessary working together to store files, without a ton of
administrative messing around about what goes where. Load balancing
is fairly automatic, and so on. 

Machines can be arranged redundantly - A4 stores some stuff from A3
and A5, and so if one box fails, the data is safe. You can add as
much redundancy as you like.

So this is how we make a distributed database: millions of machines
all interconnected, with a single naming scheme for incoming data
(the hash function which generates the names). This is a major
achievement.

But now, the hard question: "who gets to store data in this network,
and how do they pay for it?" If all those machines are owned by
Google, then this is easy: they set policy and pricing. But *surely*
we could take all those laptops and desktops at home, put DHT
storage systems on them, and all collaborate to store all the
world's content.

That raises some problems. I'll discuss hashcash, the solution to
most of those problems, in the next piece (in a few hours or
tomorrow).
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #152 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 09:03

    
Craig, as far as I know, Gavin Wood came up with "Web 3.0" around
2014/5/6?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #153 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 09:18

    
Rats. I forgot one detail.

In a DHT system, if I want a specific 6MB JPEG of Stonehenge, and I
know the hash, I can ask any computer running the right software for
a30934b7d3ca70d482745c3a7c6b9e289f73d127 and the only file it will
ever hand me is the JPEG.

This property is called "content addressability"
a30934b7d3ca70d482745c3a7c6b9e289f73d127 is the *hash of the
content* and is enough to find that file anywhere on the internet
that it may exist. It's a unique* general name for the item.

The web paradigm is

http://my.site.com/folder/subfolder/stonehenge_4.jpg

http://[DNS system goes here]/[arbitrary folder structure goes
here]/[arbitrary file name goes here]

So now we can't find the damn file because the folder structure and
the file name are just arbitrary human creations - people name
things whatever they like, or wind up with 1.jpg 2.png 3.gif in a
huge folder.

And to find the *machine* with the picture on it, we have to consult
the Domain Name System which is - yes - a pay-for-play cartel which
makes you spend $20 a year to give your machine a public name
(mycompany.com) so that people on the internet can find it. And if
they don't like what they have to say, they can kick you off the
internet. There is a huge international and national bureaucracy
with tens of thousands of human workers just managing the *names*
that we give things to find them.

And this entire paradigm? That's Web 1.0. A huge database cartel of
Domain Name Registrars who charge you fees to get your content where
the world can see it.

Distributed Hash Tables are *extremely* disruptive. They provide the
potential for annihilating the entire domain name system, the
registrars, the fees, the censorship - EVERYTHING. Simply by fixing
this core problem: "what do I name files online?"

Domain names suck. But we are so used to them we don't even
understand how weird and malign that content addressing system is.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #154 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 22 09:19

    
I don't have much to offer personally on the topic, but I'm quite
glad our State of the World is getting into the tall weeds of the
blockchain thing.  If we have to spend this whole decade dodging
variants of Covid-19 while living behind our screens, then
blockchains and DAOS and NFTs and web3s and metaverses, they're
preetty much bound to flourish like crabgrass.  Not because they're
efficient technologies, or good and clean and fair and just, or
because they can solve any of our actual problems, but just because
they're something engrossing, and maybe enriching, to do all day,
which doesn't feel like playing endless solitaire in a prison cell.

On Twitter, NFT devotees greet each other with the ritual salutation
"gm" ("good morning").  It took me a while to figure out that they
meant that they were gonna sit there chasing NFT phantoms all day. 
Every day. Until they Make It or they Get Rekt.

 It's not an arcane high-tech hobby, such as logging on to the Whole
Earth 'Lectronic Link after you've read an issue of "Whole Earth." 
It wants to be a way of life.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #155 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 09:24

    
Re. <152>: Web 3.0 was another name for the "semantic web" concept
that originated with Tim Berners-Lee in the 90s. My understanding is
that the term came from John Markoff in 2006. It was the idea of a
machine-readable web; I suppose syndication via RSS or Atom was an
example. Web3 would also be machine-readable, so seems to me it's
the same concept, but with blockchain factored in.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #156 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 09:45

    
Ah yeah. As far as I know the Gavin Wood Web 3.0 doesn't owe much to
Markoff and the semantic web - I think I'm almost the only person in
the blockchain space who has any particular interest in unifying the
semantic web concepts with the distribute web concepts.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #157 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sat 8 Jan 22 09:46

    
what i know for certain is that i'd like to have a drink with
fruitbatpangolin
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #158 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 8 Jan 22 09:55

    
> Stephen Diehl: I know him well :) He's an old friend of mine.
>
> A world class cryptographer whose company did not choose to
> issue a token.

This looks like a snide attempt to dismiss Diehl's arguments as sour
grapes, without addressing them.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #159 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 10:04

    
Certainly not snide: he's a friend who's watched people with less
skill, less talent, and less worthy objectives become billionaires
because they were willing to ruthlessly exploit the technology and
people to concentrate wealth without creating any wealth.

To then argue that what has been done is immoral is reasonable.

But the framing of the problem matters: Stephen's mostly attacking
the ponzi scheme level of the blockchain narrative (which is huge)
rather than looking at the more fundamental issues the blockchain is
trying to address:

* governments printing money leading to currency collapses, debt
bubbles and possibly wars

* censorship

We do not have good candidate technical solutions for these problems
other than *maybe* next gen (or generation after that) blockchain
systems.

Whether those problems are fixable with technology is an entirely
different question. But having some candidate technological
solutions around is not a bad thing, I think you will agree.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #160 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 22 10:30

    
Like a lot of journalists and literary people of my generational
cohort, I used to spend amazing amounts of time immersed in
newspapers and magazines.  I preferred books of imaginative fiction,
but I could see that zines and papers were more dynamic enterprises
than books.   Like the "first drafts of history," reporters were out
there slapping some shoe-leather chasing current events.

 I saw the merits of that activity, although I was too lazy and
introspective to ever be a pro journalist.  Still, I wanted to see
how it worked.  I wrote some journalism.   I edited stuff on
occasion. 

I still sympathize with what's left of the paper-printing industry,
and journalism clearly still has deep meaning for people, because
otherwise journalists wouldn't be getting vilified, spied-on and
killed all the time.   However, it's in a state of ruination.  Why
is that?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #161 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 22 10:34

    
Historically, there were many situations where free presses were
extinguished --sometimes for a generation or longer.  Commonly,
newspapers would spring back to life as soon as a regime fell.  Even
efficient police states were much-pestered by emigre presses and
underground presses -- they were visibly afraid of them.   Normal
people thirsted for these paper published products. 

Newspapers that looked and acted like the newspapers of our recent
past -- (they were cheap, they spread by post, they appeared every
day, you could throw them away like trash) -- they didn't come from
"presses."  Printing presses existed for decades before newspapers
arose.  

Instead, newspapers emerged from coffee houses.  Big-city European
coffee houses were large, well-attended, raucous social spots where
influencers, mostly businessmen but sometimes courtiers, congregated
to swap gossip and do insider-trading.  So coffee-shops resembled
modern social media. But they had no way to extend their influence
beyond their coffee-shop walls, unless somebody, standing there with
a pen and paper, heard,  summarized, edited, and distributed their
goings-on.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #162 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 22 10:35

    
The original coffee-house newspapers had gossipy names like "Tatler"
and "Spectator."  They weren't yet sober "Guardians" or "Chronicles"
because there was no such thing as a Fourth Estate.  Instead, there
was a limited technical ability to communicate any news through any
mass population.  News gathering and distribution needed almost a
parliamentary structure, with reporters resembling representatives
of beats, and editors mimicking house-whips and house speakers.

However, if all the other coffeehouses can just swap their lies and
hot rumors with other coffee-houses, then all this stately
gatekeeping becomes farfetched and archaic.  Even journalists don't
like it.  I see thousands of journalists on Twitter.  I never saw
one say, "You know what?  We journalists need an editor to
fact-check, summarize and compile our  personal Twitter musings, so
that they're more reliable, and have more dignity, and will be of
more public benefit!" 

I gave up on printed paper traditions, too.  I used to subscribe to
fifty magazines.  Nowadays, I'm a steady reader of maybe three.  On
occasion I'll read a newspaper.  It feels like watching an
eighteenth-century opera.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #163 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 22 10:36

    
A post-truth situation  ensues where nobody much cares about what's
actually happening in objective reality. Strong-man demagogues with
vast audiences of indignant, fired-up core zealots have to vie with
radical movements that are little more than clusters of memes.   
Leaders who lie all the time can't deliver the lies; their fans
adore 'em, but they're incompetent to the point of international
contempt.  Social-media unpsurges are not political parties or
interest groups.  They can't negotiate and they have no victory
condition.

That's what Kazakhstan looks like today -- it's got this
one-party-state guy who has the Xi Jinping seal-of-approval, though
he's not well-informed as Xi-- he just concentrates on his palace
intrigue.  Civil society has spontaneous violent upheavals rather
than reformers.  It's a news desert, or maybe a "news steppe," in
their case.

I wouldn't claim that "news" is any panacea for Kazakhstan, but it's
quite strange that our world is infested with trillions of dollars
of communications gadgetry and we have no idea what's going on in
Kazakhstan.  I'm sure they're anxious to tell us about their
suffering, but they themselves don't know.  They've got no method to
know.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #164 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 22 10:36

    

So, to have a "Fourth Estate" of print-media professionals with some
vested interest in an informed populace and political stability --
that's not a natural end-state for a civilization.  You can't even
legislate it into being, or underwrite it with tax breaks.   It's
more of a historic techno-social accident.  It's like a national
irrigation system where you have convenient spots to dam rivers,
form reservoirs and measure and dispense water flow.

 If you live in a swamp, it wouldn't occur to you that there might
be some advantages to that.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #165 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 10:53

    
Professions are funny that way: the sharp lines and massive cultural
divides between nurses, doctors, surgeons, midwives and
psychiatrists, for example.

Those professions arose in these forms through accidents of history,
of path dependency. What medical procedures can a doctor do that a
nurse can't? Where that line is varies country to country, decade to
decade. Midwives almost went extinct in America (in the 1950s?) and
the profession was largely rescued by the folks on Ina May Gaskin's
Farm.

Which is to say: I get what you are saying about journalism. A lot
of our best institutions are path-dependent historical accidents. 

What works well is to be treasured and preserved. Whenever possible.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #166 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 11:36

    
I suppose through journalism's greatest era, it was seen as a public
service. Creating channels for delivering the news was expensive, so
there weren't many of 'em, and they existed for prestige, not
profit. So anyone interested in exposure to news got a fairly
coherent picture of the world through those few channels, which were
somewhat aligned in what they intended and what they delivered.

Back then, professional journalism appeared and evolved with the
kinds of standards and practices we were taught in journalism school
fifty years ago - and I suspect those are still part of the
curriculum, but do they mean as much in an era where news is
for-profit, where it's characterized not as information but as
infotainment. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #167 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 8 Jan 22 11:48

    
(Oh, wow! I'm in another timezone... much slippage)

Vinay, re: <152>, and using today's version of the Memex....

I googled: "web 3.0"   [with the quote marks] then filtered the results
to dates between 1990 and 2014 and see results that appear to match my
memory traces -- namely that O'Reilly Media was hosting conferences
(and reporting about them) aimed at shaping the tech community's
thinking about 'The Web' -- in particular, that it was still evolving.

Here's a hit that gives "Web 3.0" so called 'buzzword' status as of 2010:

<https://www.macmillandictionary.com/us/buzzword/entries/web3.html>

IMO, this helps make clear the transient nature of meaning --

   "When I use a word, it means just what I choose it to mean--neither
    more, nor less."

and, in today's version of the looking glass world, Humpty Dumpty
speaks for the highest bidder. Meaning itself has become a kind of
'currency' -- a cryptic sort of currency. Dare I say, a cryptocurrency?

The arguments we usually have about the blockchain tend to be arguments
about 'meaning' that go unrecognized.  Perhaps WIRED could help us with
that.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #168 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 12:13

    
I've been hearing a distinction between "Web 3.0" and "Web3." Maybe
Web3 is seen as a reboot.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #169 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 8 Jan 22 12:22

    
Or an ongoing shift in meaning. I don't see a reason this will stop.

> ... Creating channels for delivering the news was expensive, so
> there weren't many of 'em, and they existed for prestige, not
> profit.

Not to disagree, but may I point out that we need not think of prestige
vs profit as simply a binary choice. This concepts are often deeply
entangled.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #170 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 8 Jan 22 12:29

    
Meant to say "These concepts..."

But further, this may be the the wrong level at which to think about
'The News' -- whose more substantial purpose may be something along
the lines of 'shaping consensus.'
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #171 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sat 8 Jan 22 13:09

    
xlnt disentangling by a computer scientist of web3.0

https://tante.cc/2021/12/17/the-third-web/
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #172 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 8 Jan 22 13:23

    
Here's an argument that word definitions are often a topic of social
media conflict:

Scissor Labels
<https://j.mirror.xyz/RUeJfZEZxr-hkuzUCakQyUuf2kOJVMPPiAWBaQFhhqc>

> Hyperpop is an example of what I'm calling a "scissor label,"
loosely based on Scott Alexander's "scissor statement." While his
original term, scissor statements, are truth claims engineered to
create dissent, scissor labels are categorical terms that happen to
be maximally divisive.

> A scissor label is a word or phrase that, for the first time,
establishes a widely embraced name for a trend without
simultaneously establishing a canonical definition. It is a vague
term masquerading as a specific one, where the missing definition is
still up for grabs. Scissor labels aren't coined or engineered, nor
formally initiated by an institution. Rather, they're discovered by
accident, suddenly adopted en masse amidst a trend that's already in
motion.

> Once a scissor label is established, controlling its definition
means controlling whatever the trend represents. A scissor label
therefore represents the battleground for a power struggle. By
nature, scissor labels have a peculiar divisive power, building
energy and momentum around a trend while simultaneously bringing
about controversy and debate.

[...]

These unending arguments become tedious once you recognize them for
what they are. Words are flexible and that's great! They aren't
load-bearing, though. If a word isn't doing the trick, use another.
Route around it. Paraphrase. Give examples of what you mean.

(Another good example would be the dispute over what "mild" means
for Omicron. The word is a problem, but the experts don't argue
about how to define it.)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #173 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 8 Jan 22 13:32

    
The commercial linked in <146> begins with the statement that
"Applications built on Ethereum run exactly as programmed without
any possibility of downtime, censorship, or third-party
interference." I think this means that Ethereum makes sure that
programs run in conformance with their contracts, which reasonable
people might not hear as being synonymous with "as programmed"
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #174 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 8 Jan 22 13:41

    
IN the lecture <hexayurt> posted in <143> he set a goal of making
Ethereum transactions as fast as present-day database transactions.
My feeble understanding suggests that this would mean that
cryptographic operations would have to become faster by three or
four orders of magnitude. What impact would this have on other uses
of cryptography, which rely on decryption to be difficult enough
that they remain slow compared to encryption? Decryption on Ethereum
might become much faster than encryption is when done elsewhere.
Using Ethereum to solve this problem would make Ethereum a common
point of possible failure for many security architectures.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #175 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Sat 8 Jan 22 13:49

    
Blockchain, crypto, DAO's etc.
I had a paradigm shift when I read two things, the book "Artists
Re:Thinking the Blockchain", and a recent article in Forbes where
the writer was looking at coins as software aoolications and
platforms - economics as engineering problems - that got my
attention.

In the arts, when I was in Cyprus, everyone was talking about NFTs.
I operate primarily on Foundation and Hic Et Nunc lately, although I
have a collection on openSea. 

A few anecdotes:
A young cypriot painter was minding the gallery where my curatorial
project is at Neme.org in Limassol (Sorry for the shameless plug -
you should check it out, the interviews start tomorrow)
https://www.neme.org/blog/through-the-mesh-press

(I'll likely refer to a few of the artists in these weeks)
BUT, this young lady was minding the gallery, and the co-director
Yiannis Colkaides and I were chatting, and her (apparent) brother
came in who was a computer engineer (my first degree)>

He said he was interested in NFT's, as a performance I had just been
to was a video meant for repackaging for NFT, and that seemed the
meme. Anyhow, as these things go, he asked me "What software do you
use to make NFT's?" as if anyone with a lack of imagination and MS
paint can;t do them. 

I smiled and said, as I do to anyone who thinks the computer is
going to do it for them, all they have to do is buy the right
modules from Ono-Sendai and there you have your Cyberdeck... I said,
"There's a really great hardware platform you can use to start
making NFTs..."
The young woman almost violently got out her notebook and began
scribbling frantically at my Buddhic wisdom to come.

"It's called a set of good Derwent pencils and some nice rag paper.
make some fantastic drawings of Elon Musk or something , scan them,
and then mint them on Hic et Nunc,,.,"

The scribbling was furious, then slowed...."What? You mean you can
sell drawings? Why can't we just throw together a bunch of pixels or
3D models like Beeple?" 

"Well, then, you have your model, but you know what you really have
to do is get a product together and live on twitter and Discord  and
MARKET." As Baudrillard once said, "Contemporary Art are often empty
gestures to status" (Conspiracy of Art) - And in the case of the
endless Billionaire Monkeys, I agree.

NFTs are a marketing exercise on the Warholian sense, it isn;t so
much about the art - it's the idea of selling a value proposition
that you wont lose cash when you pop $300,000 into the ape. Seems
like Yves Klein or Duchamp to me, but who am I to judge... 

But the Christies auction that had Claudia Hart, Tamiko Thiel,
Auriea Harvey, that was the real deal. I get that. Bravo on my
colleagues for netting at least $10k reserves. good on em. They
deserve it.

But Hic Et Nu=nc getting abandoned then rebuilt got my attention. A
with all these breathless speculative paces, a lot isn;t being
thought through. The NFT platforms are basically repositories that
link to the contracts, and if someone takes the platform down, all
hell breaks loose. I fully expect an NFT meltdown SOMEWHERE, and HEN
was nearly that,.

I also love the NFT Bay, where you can torrent all kinds of lifted
NFTs - of course the value is in the contract, but it points a
critical finger that;s spot on. You're buying baseball cards and
Wacky Packages. They are merely indices for fashion as frozen
capital. Fair enough.

Also, I also respect that the forbes article also speculated that
the economic chains that will power W3 probably don't exist yet.
Galt's Gulch will likely get regulated, and many of the platforms
are problematic - Bitcoin is getting old, Ethereum is too damned
slow (Sorry Vinay), and things like Polkadot are making incremental
advances. Also, interoperability is going to be key, and I like that
the Metamask Wallet allows for Eth and Polkadot.

However, with all of this being a fight for more first-world
extraction, I'm having a Don't Look Up moment in thinking we should
really be fighting to chain the Musks and Gateses and have a good
look at the great crypto money laundry.  It's almost blasphemous to
think of ripping the trillions out of the Stacks and out of the
hands of the Tecnoligarchs and placing it back into programs that
matter more to our survival.

Oh, by the way, is anyone seriously going to start talking about
population control and necropolitics before it comes to wars and
hands-off strategies re: Covid in regions that "don;t matter" to the
rich?

Bravo if you got the end of this.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #176 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 8 Jan 22 14:00

    
I was happy to see Moxie Marlinspike weigh in on the web3 debate. He
didn't just mock it. He built something and kicked the tires like a
QA tester or security researcher would do, looking for weaknesses
and explaining what he found. This is criticism worth reading, tech
blogging at its best.

<https://moxie.org/2022/01/07/web3-first-impressions.html>

And I always enjoy reading posts from Vitalik Buterin, who responded
here:

<https://www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/ryk3it/my_first_impressions_of_web3
/hrrz15r/>

It seems like they don't really disagree on the details. The current
state of things is pretty bad. The disagreement seems more about
temperament: is better to be patient or impatient? 

Marlinspike is probably impatient based on his background. He wants
Signal to win market share from WhatsApp and other chat services. He
seems to be thinking like a startup founder - you need to build the
features that users want, and if you're too slow you become
irrelevant, run out of money, and everyone leaves.

The urgent style seems native to social media and the press. We are
living in unprecedented times, etc etc. And it's also native to
financial markets.

By contrast, most of what Buterin writes exudes calm and patience.
Protocols last a long time and we can think carefully about what we
do next. If a feature isn't ready, we'll delay it. Other people can
do what they want in the meantime, but we're building things that
last and can take the time to think things through and achieve
consensus. Whatever problems users are running into now isn't our
problem. When we ship a protocol improvement, people will use what
we built.

Someday we'll see if being patient worked out for them.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #177 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 22 14:23

    
Where the Internet is concerned, we're not patient because we never
really had to be. Consider how fast http/html rolled out, and how
we've had so much evolution without much disruption. At least that's
how it appears to me.

Whereas the blockchain has been around for so many years, and few if
any of us have had our hands on a workable blockchain solution,
other than the aforementioned speculative investments in
cryptocurrencies. And maybe some of the NFT stuff (nodding to Vinay
and Pat). 

In 2017 I was trying to get my head around this stuff, and Doug
Rushkoff invited me to join him on a panel about the blockchain. I
did prep work before that panel, trying to get my head around what
was happening. I read a lot about potential use cases and
strategies, but it's been 4 years and none of that stuff seems to
have come together.

I've also had the feeling that some of the more vocal advocates
really don't understand the technology so much as the promise
they've been hearing - that we can build something both effective
and decentralized. That's a hard problem.

Meanwhile the world is experiencing increasing levels of climate
instability, and sliding into authoritarian governance (dare I say
fascism) in so many countries including the USA. Will the blockchain
fix climate change? Will DAOs decentralize governance toward some
kind of enlightenment (vs the endarkenment we see around us)? Or are
we fiddling while the planet burns?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #178 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 14:31

    
One of the games we play in the blockchain space is "which year is
it on the blockchain?"

Some people will say 1999, right before the dotcom crash.

Some people will say 1980, microcomputer revolution just starting.

I think it's more like 1976. The blockchain is a component of
something bigger, something which will tie all the world's computing
resources into a single addressable problem-solving supercomputing
surface - all the underutilize compute resources in the world,
cheaply recruitable to your problem. 

Blockchain is a small part of getting us there. It solves a couple
of problems: namespace management, and possibly (not necessarily)
payments.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #179 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 8 Jan 22 14:32

    
On blockchains and climate change, if I may suggest:
https://medium.com/humanizing-the-singularity/can-the-world-computer-save-the-
world-part-3-building-an-economy-with-a-future-5d4156f06a04 in which I suggest that we use blockchains for carbon accounting.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #180 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sat 8 Jan 22 14:32

    
Yeah, the U.S. news industry's a mess.

Neither the editorial nor the business side showed much foresight as
online publishing began in the 1990s. The money people couldn't
conceive of an end to the rivers of advertising revenue: display and
classifieds. The publishers and editors in chief loved their paper
publications so much that they were still dragging heels on digital
well into the 2000s.

There's tons of exciting innovation happening now in news with
formats, revenue streams, the relationships between newsrooms and
the communities they serve...but we're decades into right-wing
billionaires pouring money into disinformation cloaked as news. 

Meanwhile, among the fruits of the Reagan era, weaker regulations
had become "common sense." Clinton signed the Telecommunications Act
of 1996, ending decades of federal efforts to maintain decentralized
ownership of news media. 

Further, the kind of civics education I had in public school in the
1970s was beginning to erode. That curriculum was often hokey and
largely limited to majoritarian white and capitalist perspectives of
U.S. history. However, it did get across a number of important
basics, such how our government is structured. Fast forward to the
late 2010s, and only one in four Americans can name the three
branches of government. 

In my Queens classroom, we even had a lesson one day on how to
navigate the different sections of a newspaper and read a newspaper
article. I wonder if anyone still does that.


The Takeaway had a good segement on reviving civics education last
week:
https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/takeaway/segments/did-lack-civics-educati
on-play-part-insurrection 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #181 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 8 Jan 22 14:48

    
When the hype has been going for years, it's easy to be cynical.

Speaking of ongoing hype, it's now been more than a decade since
Google first announced they're working on driverless cars. I
remember some Google technologist talking about how they hoped their
kid would never need to learn to drive, and I think that kid might
have graduated from college by now?

Waymo is still plugging away, though. Maybe they'll expand to more
regions this year, but I doubt it.

---

It seems like there are contrasting ways to think about crashes and
that has something with patience versus impatience.

From a financial perspective, crashes are pretty bad! People lose
money! It's bad publicity! There are layoffs! Your stock might get
delisted. After you crash, the game is over, or at least too boring
to want to continue. Time to find a new game. (And similarly, if you
don't get out of the pump-and-dump scheme on time, you're left
holding the bag.)

But the other way to think about crashes is like a virus would
"think" about them. Viruses don't care about market share or
publicity. From an evolutionary perspective, a wave can crash but
the virus can keep coming back. Viruses don't get bored.

Sometimes crypto people talk about survival like a virus. Everyone
who didn't diversify could lose lots of money but the blockchain
will continue, and this is somehow important. The environmental
footprint will shrink and transaction costs will be low again, and
maybe the remaining die hards will go back to using it to trade
World of Warcraft cards?

Blockchains depend on civilization (electricity and network
connectivity) and on Internet geeks continuing to be interested
enough to run the servers. But not everything on the Internet dies.
Sometimes it becomes retro, and this is separate from mainstream
people talking about it. It could keep going when most people are
saying "oh them, are they still around?" Sort of like the Well.

The hype is not about bare survival though, it's about mainstream
adoption and transformative change.

(And speaking of the long term, what's the Long Now Foundation up to
lately?)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #182 of 420: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Sat 8 Jan 22 15:13

    
Thanks for that moxie.org link, Brian. Very interesting.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #183 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 8 Jan 22 15:43

    
Glad you liked it! (Previously posted in <132> but worth reposting.)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #184 of 420: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Sat 8 Jan 22 15:49

    
There's a lot going on in this topic, so I appreciate the second
chance.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #185 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 8 Jan 22 15:55

    
> When the hype has been going for years, it's easy to be cynical.

Furthermore, quite some time ago we reached the point where admitting
that one's product incorporated blockchain technology could trigger a
significant backlash from a now widely misinformed public.

Remember "Blockchain Ice Tea?"
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #186 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sat 8 Jan 22 16:01

    
Virus is a pretty good analogy for boom-bust capitalism. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #187 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 8 Jan 22 16:20

    
Agreed.  And Brian, thanks for the bit about "Scissor Labels" -- that's
another good argument against "binary thinking" -- but how, oh how will
humans ever get past that? I mean, we basically have a brain region
devoted to the making of life-prolonging binary choices ('snap
judgments'): friend or foe, fight or flight, etc.,  operating just
below conscious awareness.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #188 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 8 Jan 22 16:38

    
Binary thinking is essential to language, in the sense that you
choose to use a word or you don’t. (Though you can add qualifiers.)
I think, though, the idea that you can use tools for unintended ends
helps a bit? I’ll refer you to David Chapman, my favorite
anti-philosopher:

<https://metarationality.com/purpose-of-meaning>

> We use words as tools to get things done; and to get things done,
we improvise, making use of whatever materials are ready to hand. If
you want to whack a piece of sheet metal to bend it, and don’t know
or care what the “right” tool is (if there even is one), you might
take a quick look around the garage, grab a large screwdriver at the
“wrong” end, and hit the target with its hard rubber handle. A hand
tool may have one or two standard uses; some less common but pretty
obvious ones; and unusual, creative ones. But these are not clearly
distinct categories of usage.

> Words go the same way. Almost any word can be used to mean almost
anything, in some context. You could play this as a challenge game…
How about “The eggplant is a straw hat, and the spinach is yelling
about politics”?

> We’re in the kitchen of a vegetarian restaurant. A table’s entrees
are ready, and the server who took the order is explaining to the
one who will deliver the meal which diner gets which dish. One
customer’s flamboyant straw hat is a salient, unambiguously
identifying feature; you can see it all the way across the room. The
other probably needs to turn up a hearing aid; you can hear their
opinions about cultural appropriation all the way across the room.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #189 of 420: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Sat 8 Jan 22 18:57

    


> In my Queens classroom, we even had a lesson one day on how to
> navigate the different sections of a newspaper and read a newspaper
> article. I wonder if anyone still does that.

yes, some do. i highly recommend the News Literacy Project's email
newsletter for keeping abreast of things. 

https://newslit.org/

even if one is not a journalist or educator.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #190 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Sat 8 Jan 22 21:16

    
The Metaverse: WTF is it?
Sure, I'm being a bit flip on this one, but the idea is that I feel
like this is Wild Palms 3.0. For those of you who aren't hoary
cyberheads, I'm basically talking about the days of the Virtual
Paradise radio cast (which was made at the Cyberthon in SF in 1990,
but I got the tape on something like 93...). It had Jaron Lanier,
Terrence McKenna, and my friend Brenda Laurel speculating about this
thing called VR. TV shows like Wild Palms, VR5, and Longo's movie
Johnny Mnemonic speculated on VR becoming the new alternate world
for everything - social, commerce, intrigue. Longo's Mnemonic
actually showed a halfway interesting 3D internet that I feel could
be "metaverse-y" in the Stephenson/Snowcrash sort of thing (where
the word came from).

I'm rambling a cloud of cultural points to signify the excitement
that was going on regarding VR just before the Web. But VR was
expensive, required coding, was so.... Different.

Then came the Web. You could just type in an address, and stuff
would come up.  So, Metaverse 1.0 died.

Sure, other virtual worlds like LambdaMOO and Active Worlds came
around, but not until in the early 2000's no 3D platform had....
commerce hooked to it.

Enter Second Life (someplace, btw, I'm still on). The second life
where you could do whatever you want, with abstracted cash (Linden
Dollars)... Playboy, American Apparel, Domino's Pizza, even WalMart
was out there, along with great institutions like ZKM Karlsruhe and
Ars Electronica out there.  Business Week featured "Anshe Chung",
the world's first "Virtual Real Estate Millionaire". Artists like
Eva and franco Mattes, Second Front, and Cao Fei (who showed her
remake of Beijing at Serpentine Gallery, arguably one of the world's
leading)made groundbreaking work
... There was a boom, and promises of the Metaverse were rife. 
However, SL had its growing pains, like a weak infrastructure, its
libertaian atmosphere allowing Ponzi schemes and "ageplay" (which
got shut down after the Netherlands got involved).  

Eventually, the FOMO that companies had from SL's hype led to
commerce leaving as people just didn't wan t to get a Meat Lover;s
Pizaa in an SL Domino's. Issue was that HTTP was a standard, not a
company. Linden Labs wasn't prepared to become the 3D web, and SL
had too high of a learning curve for the average user, and to this
day, the commercial sector voices schadenfreude whenever SL (which
still has a 30,000 constant login according to Wagner James Au)
shows any hint of trouble. The private sector still smarts from its
affair with SL. Technically RIP Metaverse 2.0.

Enter Web3, Metaverse 3.0, the Meta "Mother of all Demos", in which
Zuck riffs laurie Anderson's axiom from her Puppet Motel project,
"Heaven is just like where you are right now, but MUCH MUCH better".
In the Facebook/Meta demo, Zuck picks an ideal for for his avatar -
Him.

What seems to be Metaverse 3.0 is a set of virtual environments
bound by the Blockchain, which allows owneership/commerce. This has
been the bugaboo of the virtual ever since Walter Benjamin's 1918(?)
essay where he talks about the devalusing of things through
reproduction. 

Tewo things that are disturbing about Metaverse 3.0 - it does not
seem to have any coherence. There's no Second Life for this new
social media bound by crypto. You have to hang out on Twitter and
find Discords that know these things.  The Metaverse hype seems to
be a whole bunch of (maybe) connected VR apps. However, apps often
do not share blockchains,a nd it just seems to be speculation and
island territories. 

Using the telephone system as a metaphor, things seem light at best.
I remember seeing the Walmart experience, seemed lonely, with a
virtual assistant helping you through you shopping in a near-empty
room.

Moral of the story is that I feel like I've seen this before, and if
you consider Advertising mogul Ogilvy saing to make reality
interesting...  What will be different? I WONDER.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #191 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sat 8 Jan 22 22:53

    
eh yup
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #192 of 420: Inky fingers (ianb) Sun 9 Jan 22 01:34

    
See, I hear a phrase like "all the underutilize compute resources in
the world, cheaply recruitable to your problem" and hear "massive
increase in power usage, with an incentive to move that power to
countries which have abundant supplies of fossil fuels owing to the
rising cost of energy elsewhere."

As <bruces> pointed out elsewhere, when Kazakhstan went offline
briefly, 12% of the world's Bitcoin mining vanished. Energy is dirt
cheap there, because Kazakhstan sits on huge reserves of oil and
coal, and 75% of its power is generated from those sources (the rest
by natural gas, which is an improvement over oil and coal, but not
carbon neutral by any means).
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #193 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 9 Jan 22 01:44

    
70% of Kazakhstan's electricity is made by burning coal. In old,
dirty plants that are cheap to run.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #194 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 9 Jan 22 02:05

    
Inky Fingers: it's a lot less environmentally damaging to do your
computing on a computer which already exists. If you have to buy a
computer, then do the compute, then leave it idle when you're done? 

Vastly more damaging. We need to use what we have, whatever it is,
as efficiently as possible. 

Environmentally we have not invested in *profitable efficiencies*
like home insulation. Don't expect people to make big lifestyle
sacrifices if they won't even pick up the free money lying on the
ground in things like insulating homes.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #195 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 22 02:19

    
Blockchain "Decentralized Autonomous Organizations" interest me a
lot.  They kinda do to venture capital firms what social media does
to newspapers.

They're also really a lot like 18th-century coffeeshops before
corporations were invented -- it's all about buzz and personal
connections, rather than anything like "due diligence."

Before there was any such thing as "crony capitalism," there were
just the cronies -- guys you'd literally have a cup of coffee with. 
They didn't have titles, "Chief Technical Officer," "head of
marketing," none of that -- they were just influencers.

Our understanding of history leads us to think that this is behind
us, but it may be ahead of us.  If you were a Soviet Marxist
scholar, you'd be hard put to imagine that the arc of history is
aimed directly at a de-facto Czar and a private oligarchic clique of
spies and profiteers.

But the USSR collapsed thirty years ago, while the Putin oligarchy
thing is pretty long-in-the-tooth.  Putin's reign is as old as the
21st century.  He used to be a dynamic fireball of guy, doing
karate, riding horses bareback; now he seems to be tiring, like
Brezhnev, pulling all the windows shut in his society and declaring
darkness the standard.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #196 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 22 02:22

    
The Russian media seems to have the Kazakhstan situation figured for
a failed, pro-Western "Color Revolution."  They may be right, but in
the old days, there was something Western to be pro about -- and
also, the wannabe revolutionaries at least had it together enough to
be able to pick out a color.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #197 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 9 Jan 22 02:23

    
Right, second Technical Bit: hashcash.

Hashcash is where all the pain enters the bitcoin system. It's the
foundation of proof of work. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hashcash
<- this is where the energy consumption happens.

Before we mentioned hash functions: drop in a piece of data, and get
a unique identification number back.
7845d0d110f8938de54c4f0637ed6c6a1b517000 for example. Try it here:
https://xorbin.com/tools/sha1-hash-calculator type in some text,
calculate a hash. 

Now try and find two items with the same first letter: it'll take
you 16 tries on average. First two letters? 256 tries. Three
letters? 4096 tries, and so on. A good cryptographic hash has no
shortcuts: if you want two things to match you just have to go and
try things until you get a hit, there are no shortcuts.

However, if somebody claims that "love" hashes to the same value as
"will" (93 using a slightly older gematria hash algorithm) you can
easily verify the claim by hashing the two values yourself and
checking that they match.

The asymmetry is key: it takes a long time to find things that hash
to similar values, but it is very fast to check when somebody claims
that two things have similar values.

What this means is that you can present me with evidence of
computational effort in a challenge-response system. Here's how that
works.

1) I present you with a random string "asldjasf;ljkasdf" and say
"find me a match to this string for the first eight characters of
the hash." 

2) You then have to go and do a bunch of computation to find
something with that partial match.

3) You show me the string you've found: "ejejsjsidks" and I check
its hash against my hash. If they match, you have passed my
challenge.

This asymmetry of effort is going to come up when we talk about
bitcoin mining. I'll post about that a little later. But the core
concept is: cheap for me to challenge you, and as expensive as I
want it to be for you to pass that challenge.

There are very few things in computer science which have this kind
of asymmetry of effort. These are special, useful, powerful
situations. In cryptography things with this asymmetry of effort are
called often called trapdoor functions.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trapdoor_function

Asymmetry of effort is critical. This is another thing you should
*completely understand* if you want to have a solid opinion on Web3
- it's as fundamental a building block as understanding M0, M1, M2
money supply if you want to talk about US inflation rates.

You don't need to read the code, but if you don't have the building
blocks it's almost impossible to have an informed opinion on things
like the proof-of-work / proof-of-stake divide: "killing hashcash"
is another name for that struggle. I'll post about that shortly.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #198 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 9 Jan 22 02:32

    
And, yes, very weird to me that *choices of algorithms to secure
technical systems* are now bringing down countries by destroying
their power grids and internet access.

Not something I would have foreseen. 

I think we could safely classify that as a bug that should be
reported.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #199 of 420: George Mokray (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 22 03:31

    
Via email from George Mokray:

Years ago I encountered Buddhist logic:
yes
no
not yes
not no
neither yes nor no
both yes and no

Then I began using them as answers for polls on Dailykos and found
that two more were demanded by readers:
don’t understand the question?
none of the above

That should get you out of the strict binary rut, a symptom of an
addictive system, according to Anne Wilson Schaef by the way.

I’ve also found that “truth” is a word I don’t like to use as it is
so dependent upon point of view.  I know a carpenter’s truth, when
something is straight, level and plumb;  but when talking about
people, it is highly unlikely that all those dimensions will align. 
I check and recheck my sources and try not to get stampeded, which
seems to be the basic idea of news media in these days of the
society of the spectacle.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #200 of 420: George Mokray (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 22 03:31

    
Via email from George Mokray:

Witness to a Century: George Seldes
https://www.dailykos.com/stories/2008/11/19/663606/-

The Jungle of Journalism: Upton Sinclair on the Press
https://www.dailykos.com/stories/2006/11/15/271728/-
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #201 of 420: Michael Bravo (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 22 03:34

    
Via email from Michael Bravo:

For another Kazakhstan-related quip, I find it illuminating that
there were so much interest on possible bitcoin influences, but zero
mention of the fact that Kazakhstan has 40% of world uranium mining,
and EU seems to be on the cusp of rebranding nuclear energy "green"
again (see
https://amp.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/03/fury-eu-moves-ahead-plans-label-
gas-nuclear-green)

On the Metaverse, Patrick's #190 is excellent, I wholeheartedly
concur. I would say I see more "metaverse" potential in MMOGs than
in any of the corporate-powered hype trains. The latter are, first
and foremost, utterly devoid of meaning. My clan in Destiny 2, or my
15+ years involvement in the deliciously intricate world of EvE
Online, or my escapades as a Fuel Rat in Elite Dangerous contain
immeasurably more effort, meaning, friendships, skills and
ultimately joy based on my relationships with people who play, than
anything facebook/meta/alphabet ever contemplated.

I always considered the whole approach that there are some separate
"virtual" world(s) as nonsensical. Holistical angle seems much more
natural to me - we've got this one reality substrate we operate on.
It's absolutely arbitrary how we spend the cycles. Some people
oscillate between 9-to-5 and beer and family. Some build amazing
feats of engineering despite the world laughing and cursing at them.
Some collect matchboxes. Some sail the seas. Some spend time plugged
into the techno-gig du jour wielding the sword of the Thousand
Truths with their friends across the globe. But it's all the same
real world, there's nothing "virtual" about it. It's just another go
at "us vs them".
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #202 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sun 9 Jan 22 07:44

    
George Mokray, I appreciate your comments. I don’t think anyone who
knows me well would call me an irrationally optimistic person.
However, living in the middle of several epic social, economic and
political upheavals as we all are, how do we get perspective on
whether democracies are on an inexorable decline or progressive
transformation, say? Most of the world’s wealth is permanently in
the hands of 1% of 1%  – it looked that way during the Gilded Age,
too, in the U.S. Conspiracy thinking and disinformation are going to
definitively edge out objective facts or investigative journalism
for the long haul?

Broadly defined, news media - both in the info they provide and the
means by which they provide it – have been emerging and evolving
since Gutenberg figured out how to mass produce books nearly seven
centuries ago. That’s a third of the span of time we term the
“common era.” Kinda hard to write that off as an weird and
transitory accident of civilization.

Within a few centuries of that, general elections started to appear
– limited and corrupt and sporadic, but also a leap in expectations
about who governs who after centuries of submission to divine or
religious rule.

Let’s get a lot more focused. Looking at the U.S.: When I was
switching from content strategy and web production to being an
environmental journalist around 17 years ago, Exxon was the richest
company in the history of money, and spreading climate
disinformation with abandon. Coal-fired power produced more than 50%
of America’s electricity. The common wisdom there was it wouldn’t
substantially decrease for decades.

Solar energy cost around $3 per watt to install (down from nearly $7
in the mid-1980s), and the general wisdom was it wouldn’t become as
affordable as coal or methane gas before the 2030s or later.

Today: Exxon isn’t even in the top 10 most valuable U.S. firms. It’s
disinformation efforts have been so throughly exposed that it at
least feels the need to talk the low carbon spiel, and attorneys
general are bringing a potent array of consumer fraud lawsuits. Coal
hovers at about 20% of the power supply and generally dropping.
Solar is below a dollar a watt.

Hell, between that and the renewable energy tax credits, my own
45-unit co-op here in Brooklyn has gone solar. Between the city’s
climate action law and the state’s, we’re also in the process of
retiring our gas cooking lines in favor of electric. We’re
definitely ahead of the curve for our size, but maybe also a
harbinger. Most of the shareholders here are mainstream liberals and
only agree to this stuff when it’s clearly going to be cost
effective now and improve resale value later. 

The climate crisis is also advancing way faster than we thought it
would 15-20 years ago, of course, and both the U.S. and most other
major polluters still moving way too fitfully and slowly. The sixth
great extinction isn’t something we can slow or reverse with
technology, a la carbon drawdown’s potential (let’s hope Kim Stanley
Robinbson’s scenario that dumping a planet’s worth of salt into the
Atlantic current to keep it moving has legs). That is the bleakest
situation of all.

All I’m saying is that in many ways, the “common wisdom” privileging
the negative indicators over the positive 15-20 years ago got a lot
of things wrong.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #203 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 22 08:21

    
Thanks, Emily. When all are busy protesting the darkness, it's hard
to see the light. But there is always good news as well as bad; the
psychology of infotainment privileges the bad over the good,
inherently.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #204 of 420: Gyrgir (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 22 08:24

    
Via email from Gyrgir:

I enjoyed very much Moxie Marlinspike's web3 critique: it's fair and
balanced, but ultimately brutal. I also read Vitalik's answer,
posted by <bslesins> in #176, but I have a different take on it.

Vitalik mirrors a sentiment that I often see in the tech contingent
of crypto/web3, as expressed here also by Vinay: "Yes, all these bad
things are true, but this is not what we intended.". That, and "give
it time".

But Vinay, we are not living in 1976: this is 2022 and it's all
about unintended consequences now. And we do not have time.

Anyone who claims that blockchain-as-in-practice-today is just a
basic technological brick ignores the total sum of our collective
experience from 2000 onwards.

It's like saying social networks, or even graph theory for that
matter, are a technology with both good and bad aspects, but then
again: Facebook.

I might sound rant-y but I'm an optimist at heart, and I won't throw
the baby out with the bathwater. So I'm asking: what about these
(and other) unintended consequences? What can we do about them?
Today*, not tomorrow. With blockchain or not, according to your
tastes.

For example, as Bruce wrote in #7, in our chronically diseased world
there are some things you just can't do anymore. Maybe coordinated
action at an inter-national level is one of them.

Are DAOs any kind of reasonable answer to that, today? What about in
some historical tomorrow (as opposed to a mythical/fantastical
tomorrow)?

* The 'today' restriction automatically disqualifies Vijay's carbon
accounting of #179. Not when this magnificent future comes into
being; today.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #205 of 420: Michael Bravo (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 22 08:26

    
Via email from Michael Bravo:

Something that <bruces> casually says in <195> bugs me. The reigning
wiseguy of Russia never was a "dynamic fireball of a guy" (unless
you would enjoy seeing heavy Godwin's law applications to be labeled
as "dynamic fireballs"). He is a career KGB officer, serving in East
Germany for the peak of that career (think Stasi liaisons). He
almost ended up as a minor municipal grifter at the end of USSR, but
was wily enough to build organized crime connections that have
propelled him to where he is now, a professional top klept player.
People he trained in a judo club with, played ice hockey with, who
cooked for him or played music for him, [and survived] have all been
integrated into the klept structure to help protect the money and
the machine that extracts it from the country. Notable difference
from Corleone is that there are no horse heads these days, instead
you get a team of faceless FSB spooks slathering nerve agent on your
underwear.

So a dynamic sleazeball - maybe, and that's already a stretch.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #206 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 9 Jan 22 08:54

    <scribbled by bslesins Sun 9 Jan 22 08:55>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #207 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 9 Jan 22 08:57

    
During the pandemic I've gotten used to looking at charts and the
solar ones look a lot more cheerful than the pandemic ones.

It is discouraging when large forests in the Western US go up in
smoke though. One estimate has emissions from wildfires in the
Western US last summer at 130 million tons [1].

To put that in perspective, that seems to be about twice Bitcoin.

[1]
<https://indianexpress.com/article/technology/science/californias-wildfires-hig
h-carbon-dioxide-emissions-7537351/>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #208 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 9 Jan 22 09:16

    
Gyrgir:

https://twitter.com/avalancheavax/status/1456334992687128577?lang=en-GB

Avalanche is 20? 30? 100? times faster than Ethereum, Ethereum
compatible, and emits less than 500 tons of carbon a year - and is
offset.

I sorted out their carbon credits buy last year for COP26, as well
as encouraging them to go Net Zero in the first place.

It's already here. Ethereum will take a bit longer to reach Net
Zero, but they'll get there.

Bitcoin is A Problem. It would cost about a billion dollars a year
to get Bitcoin to Net Zero. Maybe half that if they can prove how
much solar/hydro/wind they are using, which is going to be tricky.
Moving those people to Net Zero is going to take either a miracle or
acts of law: they've defined that electricity burn as core to their
security model, so they would have to unpick a decade of propaganda
to move to a "proof of stake" bitcoin fork.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #209 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 9 Jan 22 09:35

    
On the topic of patience versus urgency, I tend to want to push back
against urgency as a default mode of communication, as is so often
the case in social media, at least the stuff widely shared. I feel
like if you're going to urge people along then you ought to have
some specific thing you want them to do. Maybe people will buy your
sales pitch and maybe they won't, but the call to action should at
least be legible.

Too often we seem to be urging others to hate on the designated
enemy or be very depressed about the world. As observers hanging out
in an Internet forum, I don't think we urgently need to do that.
They are not really actions so it doesn't matter if we do them or
not.

A small, local kind of urgency that I can get behind is getting
people to read an article or watch a video that you think is really
great. Or read a book?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #210 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 9 Jan 22 09:52

    
Bitcoin is unnecessary.

Many of us have heard the chestnut "APIs are forever". Protocols are
even more persistent. There's no incentive built into the Bitcoin
protocol to encourage green mining, other than the cost of
electricity. This suggests to me that mining will never move very
far toward Net Zero.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #211 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 9 Jan 22 09:58

    
Encouraging people to learn about Avalanche is a thing you could do.
There are many cryptocurrencies, though, and researching them tends
to be unpleasant reading. (Or worse, watching videos of talking
heads.) It's an uphill battle. An in-depth blog post of the sort
Marlinspike wrote, by someone who knows something and isn't afraid
to kick the tires, would probably be helpful for any new
cryptocurrency.

I'm reminded of Jepsen tests. A computer researcher started blogging
about testing the claims made by vendors of distributed databases
and finding how they break. This eventually became a sort of
quasi-standard where upcoming authors of new distributed databases
would want to have him run his tests and write an evaluation, to
show they are serious.

(In this way I am rooting for team curiosity without, you know,
actually being curious enough to volunteer.)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #212 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Sun 9 Jan 22 10:05

    
Brian,
I (at least this year) teach in a Mass Communication department,
where we teach about advertising giants like David ogilvy and the
like, and I agree totally on the urgency take. Unless I'm
misintepreting, there need to be media people who are able to do
better than to throw flotillas of statistics and say "WE GOTTA DO
SOMETHING!"  There needs to be somewhere that is able to cut through
the Fake and say clearly, calmly in a way that has real
consequences, "Look we don't have all the answers yet, but here are
some beginnings."  Part of steering the Queen Mary is taking resolve
for someone to start steering. 

Individuals are probably not going to enact this sort of change. 
It's going to take platforms, nation states, whatever to get things
moving. And some of it won't be fair or profitable. The question is
systemic; eventually there's probably going to be a class revolt,
world war, or systemic collapse. I wish I could say 50-100 years,
but if Trump gets re-elected, I wager 5-10.

But the way the system is gerrymandered globally, someone has to
blink, and IMO, web3 or the Blockchain isn't going to solve it.  The
digital network as a whole, and even if humanity goes wholly
electric, none of this is sustainable.

What to do? Honestly consider radical models of sustainability, zero
waste (as Eath is a closed homeostatic system), and get serious
about consumptive attenuation models before Malthus rises from the
grave.

Energy-wise, Nuclear's re-emergence is scary. Green Hydrogen and
gravity batteries seem really interesting.  But Mars colonization
isn't happening, and capitalism;s eternal growth model is't
sustainable. 
'
But to get here, I agree that urgency probably won't work either.
Clear, modest goals over short increments, and thinking of how to
have a gentle necropolitics.

Next episode: The Metaverse, or why automation will cause BMI then a
new labor market in cyberspace. Homework: "Hyper-Reality" (Video by
Keiichi Matsuda)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #213 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Sun 9 Jan 22 10:10

    
And, by the way, After the Metaverse post, I'll try to think of
something positive.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #214 of 420: John Coate (tex) Sun 9 Jan 22 10:11

    
A data point about the news business: in 2000, the last year I was
at the SF Chronicle (managing sfgate.com), the paper grossed 139
million dollars in classified revenue. Now they don't even have a
serious classified section.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #215 of 420: Axon (axon) Sun 9 Jan 22 10:13

    
>Too often we seem to be urging others to hate on the designated
enemy or be very depressed about the world.

Performative defeatism. It's viral among the butthurt left.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #216 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 9 Jan 22 10:52

    
Patrick,

I did some futuring around what real sustainability might look like
in America about 15 years ago.
https://www.shareable.net/the-unplugged/

=== quote begins ===
So we Unpluggers found a new way to unplug: an independent
life-support infrastructure and financial architecture – a society
within society – which allowed anybody who wanted to "buy out" to
"buy out at the bottom" rather than "buying out at the top."

If you are willing to live as an Unplugger does, your cost to buy
out is only around three months of wages for a factory worker, the
price of a used car. You never need to "work" again–that is, for
money which you spend to meet your basic needs.
=== quote ends ===

I think we're getting pretty close to the point where that might
start kicking in. The Tiny House movement is a stab at it, and the
issues around banning tiny houses and the general tensions around
property values and so on.

If you legalized tiny houses as long as they were off-grid solar and
super insulated - a green building code for tiny houses in fact - I
think tens of millions of Americans would slash their ecological
footprint by moving into one. Certainly so many young people.

Then inside your tiny house you can go flying in a hang glider over
Zurich for 15 cents of electricity to run your VR goggles.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #217 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 9 Jan 22 11:00

    
On nuclear: the big problems with nuclear are fourfold.

1) it's super expensive
2) it can be used to make weapons
3) old reactors are super hard to maintain and decommission - they
get dangerous and sometimes explode
4) what to do with the waste

I have a *super not good* solution for this.

https://www.geocurrents.info/geopolitics/mapping-u-s-foreign-military-bases

Have the US military build nuclear reactors on all of its bases
around the world, and plug them into the national grid of their host
countries to provide power. US DoD now has a gigantic big ticket
item they can transfer over all their dumb pork war projects over
to. Pork for centuries. No problem getting it through congress.

And take 100% responsibility for maintaining and operating the
reactors: they are simply a part of normal base operations. Build
reactors everywhere. Charge some low low price for the power (it's
subsidised by pork) and cement the dependency of many poor nations
on US assistance.

Great plan, right? 

Green nuclear imperialism could save the planet. WHAT COULD POSSIBLY
GO WRONG?

I think this is possibly the worst idea I ever had, but it sure has
some fantastic chrome on it.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #218 of 420: Andrew Alden (alden) Sun 9 Jan 22 11:35

    
And think of what the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (or whatever its current
name is) could do with the military budget behind it!
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #219 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 9 Jan 22 11:55

    
I've been skeptical of nuclear energy for a long time for reasons
like the ones <hexayurt> listed. Some reading I did last month
suggested to me that I might have been too hasty in deciding that I
knew enough to draw worthwhile conclusions.

1970-generation nuclear generating stations are very expensive
because they use the light water moderated design that Adm. Hyman
Rickover chose to power nuclear submarines, in about 1949. He made
the right choice for powering submarines, and that design has worked
very well for the Navy. Scaled up by a factor of 500 for power
generating stations, the design needs elaborate and redundant
operating infrastructure to keep it safe. We don't have to stay
stuck with that design. That it's difficult and expensive to
decommission that generation of reactors is largely because the
design requires such large structures.

Jimmy Carter halted movement toward reprocessing of spent fuel over
concern that it would result in a plutonium economy and
proliferation of weapons. This was based on a politically alarming
but technically inaccurate premise, that plutonium from power
reactors could be used to make bombs. The isotopic mix in plutonium
from power reactors is not suitable for making bombs.

I think I'm moving, to quote the immortal Rocket J. Squirrel, toward
saying "This time, for sure!" in thinking that nuclear engineers
will pull a rabbit out of a hat soon. The industry has been
promising sweet technologies, coming real soon, that would make
nuclear energy cheap and safe. This time they may be right.

The key technology is reactors that run on fuel dissolved in molten
salt, with a thorium-based fast neutron fuel cycle that burns up
most of what would be useless waste in a light water reactor and
that doesn't produce fissionable residue. These reactors are much
closer to being fail safe than are light water reactors and don't
need elaborate support systems to achieve that safety. With
reprocessing, the amount of long-half-life waste would be reduced by
more than 95%, which would mean that the already-developed
repositories would handle a much larger fraction of the storage
requirement.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #220 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 9 Jan 22 12:14

    
Nuclear's *hard*
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2018/08/180823113558.htm
pebble bed reactors were going to save us, then not so much.

Does not predict future performance, of course.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #221 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 22 12:27

    
James Lovelock, of the Gaia hypothesis, has been in favor of nuclear
energy sources:
<http://www.jameslovelock.org/nuclear-power-is-the-only-green-solution/>

"Opposition to nuclear energy is based on irrational fear fed by
Hollywood-style fiction, the Green lobbies and the media. These
fears are unjustified, and nuclear energy from its start in 1952 has
proved to be the safest of all energy sources. We must stop fretting
over the minute statistical risks of cancer from chemicals or
radiation. Nearly one third of us will die of cancer anyway, mainly
because we breathe air laden with that all pervasive carcinogen,
oxygen. If we fail to concentrate our minds on the real danger,
which is global warming, we may die even sooner, as did more than
20,000 unfortunates from overheating in Europe last summer."

I'm offering this as JADP; I don't know enough about nuclear energy
to say whether he's got a point. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #222 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 9 Jan 22 12:31

    
He has a point, but he's picked the wrong risk: Chernobyl and
Fukushima are not the problem.

North Korea and Pakistan are the problem.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #223 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 9 Jan 22 14:26

    
I don't know anything about this guy but this seems to be a good
introduction to Kazakhstan's significance for the Russians,
particularly for those (like me) who were thinking of it as "one of
those former Soviet republics."

<https://twitter.com/ClintEhrlich/status/1479517789450911747>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #224 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 9 Jan 22 15:10

    
all seems very reasonable.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #225 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 9 Jan 22 15:16

    
hmm, just did a search on clint ehrlich which made him sound very
pro russia


https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/craigsilverman/the-report-was-actually-ca
lled-shower-of-falsehoods


but i didnt read that twitter stream as being that way.it just
explained why russia would be so tweaked about what's going on in
kazakhstan.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #226 of 420: Michael Bravo (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 00:47

    
Via email from Michael Bravo:

I'd like to propose a mental experiment - take <hexayurt>'s
four-point problem list from <217> and replace "nuclear" with
"airplanes" early enough. These heavier-than-air contraptions are
super suspect, very expensive, dangerous as hell, can be used to
make weapons (what can NOT, by the way?), and burn fossil fuels
aplenty.

That is not a list of problems [with nuclear]. That's a list of
excuses, quite similar to a long list of technologies "corrupting
youth" - from books to telegraph to newspapers to radio to
television to smartphones to virtual worlds.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #227 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 22 00:51

    
*The great-and-the-good in NATO-land won't do much about Kazakhstan
-- not even for the sake of the copious oil, gas, coal and nuclear.
Ukraine they'll give guns to, Belarus they'll make noise about,
Kazakhstan is somebody else's problem.

*Also, even if the Kazakh rebels win, nobody wants to be seen in
retrospect as having kissed ISIS on the lips.  If the Mujihadeen
Lafayette Escadrille isn't in Kazakhstan already, they'll be there
as soon as they can get safe-houses.

*The Kazakh foreign ministry -- (whoever's left of it after the
palace purges) -- has come up with a narrative:

"The foreign ministry of Kazakhstan blamed 'certain foreign media'
for portraying the police violence as aimed against the peaceful
protesters, who took the streets because of the hike of gas fuel
prices.

“'Peaceful rallies were held in Mangystau region and in all major
cities of the country. The protesters’ demands were fully met.
However, the peaceful protests were hijacked by terrorist, extremist
and criminal groups to escalate tensions and violence. In this
respect, a state of emergency was declared in the country', the
foreign ministry says in a statement circulated on Sunday.

"The Kazakh authorities blame for the unrest terrorists trained
abroad, although they don’t says who they are, from where they have
come and who is financing them."  (((That's true, but that's kind of
a high standard of proof -- nobody asks that about the USA's January
6 insurrectionists, either, and they were doing all that in broad
daylight, with iPhones and credit cards.)))

“'Kazakhstan has been subjected to armed aggression by
well-coordinated terrorist groups trained abroad. According to
preliminary data, the attackers include individuals who have
military combat zone experience in the ranks of radical Islamist
groups. Currently, the law enforcement agencies and armed forces of
Kazakhstan are confronting terrorists, not 'peaceful protesters' as
some foreign media misrepresent it', the ministry states. 
(((Somebody was decapitating the police, which is kind of a
signature move when you want a mujihadeen-friendly atmosphere of
polarization.)))

"Reportedly, the Kazakh law enforcement agencies have been
instructed to conduct a large-scale investigation of the causes of
the current situation. It is said that their results would be
presented to the international community.  (((They're kicking the
football into next week and hoping everybody forgets about it. 
Which is, in fact, pretty likely, unless somebody doubles-down with
coordinated car-bombs.  Except for the mujihadeen factions, no power
player actually WANTS any trouble in Kazakhstan, it's bad for
business all around.  Also, the Kazakhs lack spiteful enemies.  If
anything, people admire the Kazakhs. they're like the upbeat, Dubai
version of Central Asians.)))

"Kazakhstan also stresses that it is in control of the situation and
the troops form the Russia-led Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) are on its territory on a temporary basis." 
(((If they leave, it'll be more remarkable than if they stay.)))
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #228 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 10 Jan 22 03:29

    
What's the source of that piece? So far I think I've seen reports
that this is a feud between rival oligarchs, that the country's most
prominent gangster has been arrested, and that a high official in
the security service has been arrested.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #229 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 10 Jan 22 04:37

    
Michael Bravo:

Aeroplanes kill a few people here and there. Nuclear proliferation
is a *dramatically* worse problem than people think it is.
Everybody's taken their eyes off that ball because nobody's dropped
a nuke on humans in almost living memory.

It's going to bite us hard the next time somebody uses a nuke.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #230 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 07:14

    
This is the apparent source of <227>:
<https://www.euractiv.com/section/central-asia/news/eu-ministers-to-consider-me
asures-over-kazakh-crackdown/>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #231 of 420: Gyrgir (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 07:15

    
Via email from Gyrgir:

Thanks for the Avalanche link, Vinay. It conforms with my 'now,
today' requirements, I concede the point. Orthogonally, I'm not
happy with carbon accounting in this way because it depends on all
kinds of data that aren't there, blockchain or not. It also follows
a near identical hype curve with Internet of Things and for good
reason. As nothing large-scale beneficial happened through/with IoT
in the last 10 years, I don't expect anything from carbon accounting
either.

Incidentally, there is no urgency in my "now, today", as in: "bring
the Future faster to Today". Rather it's a very Zen thing, as in
"your future doesn't exist".

So I found myself agreeing with both Brian Slesinsky's #211 and
Patrick Lichty's #212. Telling people to urge/panic without a plan
would be Bad (TM). Governments though? I'm not so sure, but here we
are, in this broken timeline's 2022 of mass inability to act in
scale. We've all seen the GOP26 show.

I don't want to sit and wait though, afraid to tell people to act.
That would be BAD > Bad (TM), for all of us.

But I don't rush: I live in the here-now, and I'm a survivor of 2020
and 2021, so I know to pick my battles. This is one of them.

I think Marlinspike's urgency was more along the lines of "all
intermediate steps must make sense, not only the (mythical/intended)
last", and what he saw didn't make sense to him today.

I guess he meant it in the agile way of "let's iterate, on what the
customer wants" but I find it works in general. When everything
around you accelerates, in Paul Virilio's sense, the only course of
action is to act in a way that makes sense in the here-now. The
better informed you are, the more it will make sense in the
here-tomorrow's-now, but then again information is not what it used
to be. It's a numbers game now.

And I didn't even wrote anything about the unintended consequences
aspect. Who should clean our mess?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #232 of 420: r.u.a.cyberpunk (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 07:19

    
Via email from "r.u.a.cyberpunk" - a link to a Bruce Sterling video
archive:

I've been collecting bruce sterling talks for a while--

So after spending some time locked in my house for "some unspecified
reason", I decided to scrap the web looking for all the <bruces>
talks that could be out there, floating in the ether.

Then I thought "maybe I should classify all those videos in order to
make sense of the thing", and then "after all that work, maybe
somebody else is interested in it"...

long story short:
<https://r-u-a-cyberpunk.github.io/bruces/videos.html>


btw have fun with the state of the world chat
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #233 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 07:23

    
The President of Kazakhstan says there was an attempted coup, which
is the way he's characterizing the protests:
<https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/president-kazakhstan-says-he-has-we
athered-attempted-coup-detat-2022-01-10/>

"Tokayev defended his decision to invite Russian-led troops into the
country and said that doubts over the legitimacy of that mission
stemmed from a lack of information.

"Kazakhstan would soon provide proof to the international community
about what had happened, he said.Sixteen members of the security
forces were killed, while the number of civilian casualties is still
being checked, he said."
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #234 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 10 Jan 22 10:32

    
So he cut off communication with the outside world and blamed his
critics for working with inadequate information. And now he'll tell
us the real story. Uh huh.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #235 of 420: Axon (axon) Mon 10 Jan 22 12:15

    
>Aeroplanes kill a few people here and there

Mostly there: drone warfare.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #236 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 10 Jan 22 12:44

    
Building new nuclear reactors with fuel cycles that don't produce
materials usable in bombs does not significantly increase the risk
of proliferation of weapons. Denying the reality that Iran is
responding rationally to the threat to them from Israel's nuclear
arsenal is a driver of proliferation.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #237 of 420: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Mon 10 Jan 22 13:03

    

>  Aeroplanes kill a few people here and there.

"Taking a long-haul flight generates more carbon emissions than the average
person in dozens of countries around the world produces in a whole year."



https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2019/jul/19/carbon-calc
ulator-how-taking-one-flight-emits-as-much-as-many-people-do-in-a-year

2019, The Guardian
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #238 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 10 Jan 22 13:17

    
Yes, but the really heavy emissions national are from things like
millions of people commuting 60 miles a day and eating beef - or
just living in a very cold climate and keeping warm.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #239 of 420: Axon (axon) Mon 10 Jan 22 13:38

    
>the really heavy emissions

Are generated by extractive economics at corporate scale.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #240 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 10 Jan 22 13:44

    
It's disingenuous to blame personal habits in a society that's
structured so they're hard to change. People can't choose whether to
commute long distances by car unless they can afford to live close
to where they work or close to efficient public transit.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #241 of 420: Mark Kraft (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 13:58

    
Via email from Mark Kraft:

"I'm not sure what Russia could do at this point in regards to
Ukraine... that would prompt the USA or EU nations to send more than
stern messages and sanctions to its defense."

I wouldn't trivialize sanctions. In 2008, the GDP for Russia fell
over 25%, with long term impacts lasting several years. If Russia
invades, expect an economic/military slog match lasting at least
months, with stubborn resistance from the Ukrainians that gives way
east of the Dnieper, but solidifies near Kyiv.

The US would likely see it as another Afghanistan-like opportunity
to back 42 million Ukrainians with a flood of "cheap" weapons meant
to knock out expensive tanks, helicopters, transports, etc. Ukraine
has a large reserve force, and even if the cities are surrounded by
tank spearheads, expect them to make occupying and supplying
frontline troops difficult, with the potential for bloody,
Grozny-like urban fighting and sustained insurgent attacks. Flat
land ideal for tanks could suddenly become swamps, if decisions are
made to destroy dams. 

If any of this happens, expect Russia to lie about the numbers of
the dead, with grieving women once more becoming Russia's
destabilizing truth tellers.

Short of a dubious complete Russian military victory, where they
rapidly push into Kyiv and occupy Ukraine before resistance
solidifies, the real battle has already been lost. Soviet
infrastructure was largely designed to extract raw materials from
its territories and turn them into more expensive finished goods,
locking them into an unfavorable state of dependence.Ukraine
responded to Russian invasion by shifting much of their Russian
exports to EU and Turkey. Meanwhile, despite Russian efforts to
topple Ukraine, in the two years prior to Covid, the Ukrainian
economy grew ~50% faster than that of Russia, with a large growth in
exports.

People talk about Russia being afraid of democracy, but perhaps more
than that, they are afraid of its neighbors realizing they'd be much
better served bringing their trade - and money, and talent -
elsewhere.

Russia's economy is already facing Covid job losses, reduced
exports, and inflation. Can they really afford protracted sanctions
and their neighbors using the opportunity to reduce trade too? I
don't expect Putin to invade, unless it's limited in nature,
designed to bring parts of Eastern Ukraine fully into Russia,
followed by a quick declaration of victory. Rather, I expect Putin
to let Biden try to appease him.

The intended message will be that crossing Putin and establishing
closer western ties comes at a price, possibly spooking some
would-be investors.

It's one thing to pressure - or occupy - your neighbors, so they
stay in your sphere. It's something else entirely to peacefully,
affordably keep them there, or convince their best and brightest to
study in Moscow and help revitalize an increasingly moribund nation.
The Soviets failed to keep 30 million Afghanis down, even with
direct borders. Why should we believe that Russia by itself can do
better versus 45M Ukrainians?

Ultimately, though, what Putin is doing won't reverse Russia's long
term problems. They are a huge, inefficient nation with a rapidly
shrinking, aging population and a crumbling, expensive-to-maintain
infrastructure, much of it built on melting permafrost.  Meanwhile,
their economy is dependent on significantly useless weapons and dead
dinosaurs, keeping the LONG, LONG recession that's coming at bay,
for now.

""Russia's fate and its historic prospects depend on how many of us
there are." - V. Putin

Those few nations that are brave enough to resist nationalists and
open their doors to young immigrants now will be in a much better
situation in the future. In truth, Russia should be tempting
immigrants throughout Asia with free land now, before snow packs
decrease, rivers start to dry up, and populations migrate out of
necessity.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #242 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 14:47

    
Here's a quote from Barbara Walter, whose book _How Civil Wars
Start_ will be published soon. The book is about "about the factors
that increase the likelihood that countries will turn to violence,
and their growing presence in American life. Walter, a leading
authority on international security and civil wars who helps run the
award-winning blog Political Violence At a Glance
<https://politicalviolenceataglance.org/>, is a professor of
political science at UC San Diego and a research affiliate at IGCC."

She tweets at <https://twitter.com/bfwalter>, and her site is
<https://www.barbarafwalter.com/>.

"The US government’s Political Instability Task Force, which I
joined 2017, has identified two factors that best predict where
political instability and civil war is likely to break out around
the world. The first and most important is whether a country is what
we call an anocracy—neither fully democratic nor fully autocratic.
Countries most at risk of civil wars are those that are
transitioning rapidly from one end of the political spectrum to the
other. Think about Iraq in 2003, when the United States went in,
toppled Saddam Hussein, and wanted to set up a democracy. It didn’t
take long for Iraq to spiral into civil war. But it can also happen
in the other direction, when a country is rapidly moving from
democracy to something less democratic. Think about Ukraine just a
few years ago.

"The second thing is whether “ethnic entrepreneurs” emerge in these
countries who mobilize citizens around ethnic, religious, or racial
lines. Those countries are most at risk of civil war.

"So I’m sitting on this task force and we’re studying countries
around the world. And I start to realize that these two factors are
emerging in the United States at a surprisingly rapid rate. The
United States, for most of its history, has been considered fully
democratic. Starting in 2016, one of the datasets that measures the
level of democracy began to downgrade the United States. And in
January of this year, for the very first time since the late 1700s,
the United States was classified as an anocracy. We are now in that
middle zone where the risk of political instability and violence
increases. Then, in 2020, the United States was classified as
factionalized, because our political system is increasingly
polarized around identity."

<https://igcc.ucsd.edu/news-events/news/is-the-us-header-toward-civil-war.html>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #243 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 14:52

    
Here's a Vox piece by Zack Beauchamp that quotes Barbara Walter:
<https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/22814025/democracy-trump-january-6-cap
itol-riot-election-violence>

"Walter doesn’t think that a rerun of the American Civil War is in
the cards. What she does worry about, and believes to be in the
realm of the possible, is a different kind of conflict. 'The next
war is going to be more decentralized, fought by small groups and
individuals using terrorism and guerrilla warfare to destabilize the
country,' Walter tells me. 'We are closer to that type of civil war
than most people realize.'

"How close is hard to say. There are important differences not only
between the United States of today and 1861, but also between
contemporary America and Northern Ireland in 1972. Perhaps most
significantly, the war on terror and the rise of the internet have
given law enforcement agencies unparalleled capacities to disrupt
organized terrorist plots and would-be domestic insurgent groups.

"But violence can still spiral absent a nationwide bombing campaign
or a full-blown war — think lone-wolf terrorism, mob assaults on
government buildings, rioting, street brawling."
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #244 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 10 Jan 22 15:43

    
In terms of American civil war 2.0 stuff I think the most likely
flashpoint is Texas secessionism. Lots of people with extremist
views are moving in to Texas and lots of (sensible) moderates are
moving out. If there's a Democratic victor in 2022 and the Texans
refuse to accept the results of the election and split from the
union many neighbouring states will follow them - could rip as far
as Alberta, Canada and south into Texas. 

In fact one likely first move is to mount a lightweight invasion of
Texas - grab and garrison one small town - to make it into an
international incident. Try to get the UN involved to massively
muddy the waters and slow down US Federal reprisals.

It's one messy conflict: 10 million Americans hunt deer. US has
about 250,000 infantry. Lot of troops refuse to fight - at least to
do things like bomb cities. Some mutiny. Scramble to secure nukes.

It can all be avoided: hand

* drug law
* abortion law
* gun law
* LGBT law

to the States. Require freedom of movement between the States as an
absolute right, and have a Federal fund to relocate people whose
civil liberties are infringed by the new regime.

Culture war evaporates, everybody moves to a place they can deal
with, and America moves forwards again as a people united by their
diversity.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #245 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 10 Jan 22 15:44

    
Correction: could rip as far as Alberta, Canada and south into
**MEXICO**. 

Most of the middle strip in America would go with an independent
Greater Texas. The Canadians coming along is a wild card.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #246 of 420: Axon (axon) Mon 10 Jan 22 16:21

    
>Lots of people with extremist
views are moving in to Texas and lots of (sensible) moderates are
moving out.

Texas has added 9 Hispanic residents for every new white resident in
the last year. The real show in Texas is the minoritization of
non-Hispanic whites, already down to 42% as contrasted to 39%
Hispanics. White Texans will be overshadowed by Hispanics in short
order. This is a microcosm of what is driving increasingly volatile
behavior on the part of conservatives nationwide; they can see the
end of the runway from here. Their privilege of pallor is about to
evaporate, and they're loathe to surrender it.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #247 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 10 Jan 22 16:30

    
I did not know that about immigration to Texas. That's an amazing
statistic.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #248 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 18:46

    
> Texas has added 9 Hispanic residents for every new white resident 
> in the last year.

That was 2018. I haven't seen stats for 2021.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #249 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 18:47

    <scribbled by jonl Mon 10 Jan 22 18:48>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #250 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 18:49

    <scribbled by jonl Mon 10 Jan 22 18:49>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #251 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 18:52

    <scribbled by jonl Mon 10 Jan 22 18:54>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #252 of 420: George Mokray (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 22 18:58

    
(Sorry about the scribbles - formatting on the 2nd paragraph was a
problem. I think I have it fixed now.)

Via email from George Mokray:

Anybody interested in an online/all the time World Game for all
those who are for the benefit of all who are for the benefit of all?
I mean, just as a thought experiment.

<https://essd.copernicus.org/preprints/essd-2021-386/>
Global Carbon Budget 2021

Received: 28 Oct 2021 – Accepted for review: 29 Oct 2021 –
Discussion started: 04 Nov 2021

Abstract. Accurate assessment of anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions and their redistribution among the atmosphere, ocean, and
terrestrial biosphere in a changing climate is critical to better
understand the global carbon cycle, support the development of
climate policies, and project future climate change. Here we
describe and synthesize data sets and methodology to quantify the
five major components of the global carbon budget and their
uncertainties. Fossil CO2 emissions (EFOS) are based on energy
statistics and cement production data, while emissions from land-use
change (ELUC), mainly deforestation, are based on land-use and
land-use change data and bookkeeping models. Atmospheric CO2
concentration is measured directly, and its growth rate (GATM) is
computed from the annual changes in concentration. The ocean CO2
sink (SOCEAN) is estimated with global ocean biogeochemistry models
and observation-based data-products. The terrestrial CO2 sink
(SLAND) is estimated with dynamic global vegetation models. The
resulting carbon budget imbalance (BIM), the difference between the
estimated total emissions and the estimated changes in the
atmosphere, ocean, and terrestrial biosphere, is a measure of
imperfect data and understanding of the contemporary carbon cycle.
All uncertainties are reported as ±1&#963;. For the first time, an
approach is shown to reconcile the difference in our ELUC estimate
with the one from national greenhouse gases inventories, supporting
the assessment of collective countries’ climate progress.

For the year 2020, EFOS declined by 5.4% relative to 2019, with
fossil emissions at 9.5+/- 0.5 GtC yr-1 (9.3 +/- 0.5 GtC yr-1 when
the cement carbonation sink is included), ELUC was 0.9 +/- 0.7 GtC
yr-1, for a total anthropogenic CO2 emission of 10.2 +/- 0.8 GtC
yr-1 (37.4 +/- 2.9 GtCO2). Also, for 2020, GATM was 5.0 +/- 0.2 GtC
yr-1 (2.4 +/- 0.1 ppm yr-1), SOCEAN was 3.0 +/- 0.4 GtC yr-1 and
SLAND was 2.9 +/- 1 GtC yr-1, with a BIM of -0.8 GtC yr-1. The
global atmospheric CO2 concentration averaged over 2020 reached
412.45 +/- 0.1 ppm. Preliminary data for 2021, suggest a rebound in
EFOS relative to 2020 of +4.9% (4.1% to 5.7%) globally. 

Overall, the mean and trend in the components of the global carbon
budget are consistently estimated over the period 1959–2020, but
discrepancies of up to 1&#8201;GtC&#8201;yr&#8722;1 persist for the
representation of annual to semi-decadal variability in CO2 fluxes.
Comparison of estimates from multiple approaches and observations
shows: (1) a persistent large uncertainty in the estimate of
land-use changes emissions, (2) a low agreement between the
different methods on the magnitude of the land CO2 flux in the
northern extra- tropics, and (3) a discrepancy between the different
methods on the strength of the ocean sink over the last decade. This
living data update documents changes in the methods and data sets
used in this new global carbon budget and the progress in
understanding of the global carbon cycle compared with previous
publications of this data set (Friedlingstein et al., 2020;
Friedlingstein et al., 2019; Le Quéré et al., 2018b, 2018a, 2016,
2015b, 2015a, 2014, 2013). The data presented in this work are
available at <https://doi.org/10.18160/gcp-2021> (Friedlingstein et
al., 2021).
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #253 of 420: Angie Coiro (coiro) Mon 10 Jan 22 20:16

    
No, no, and no again to states' authority over women's bodies. NO.
We've already watched that show. My autonomy as a fully functioning
adult is not available for either compromise nor surrender.

I have every right as a woman and LGBTQ person to live in Galveston
for the creative spirit, or New Orleans for the jazz, or Oklahoma
for - for whatever the hell people live in Oklahoma for, and my
rights go with me. I'm not about to chase them cross-country.
Period.

If that's a chip I have to give up to keep the country in one piece,
it's not worth saving.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #254 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 03:21

    
Angie: The State already claims authority over women's bodies -
that's why some birth control pills are legal, and others were
blocked by the FDA as too dangerous. It's why you can smoke weed in
some places, but not others.

State interference in personal bodily choice is everywhere: abortion
being moved from "easy to get legitimate elective medical procedure"
to "felony murder in most instances" is egregious, but so was the
War On Drugs - government does evil and outrageous things all the
time, and they affect some people (inner city youth, women) more
than others. The State is a beast. The alternatives to the State
appear worse. Life sucks, then you die.

If it comes to civil war, millions to tens of millions of people
might die. Certainly global power will shift to Russia, China, and
other less-than-democratic regimes.

It's all very well to talk about your rights, but the question is
this: *how many people are you and your faction willing to kill to
enforce those rights*.

Enforcing the rights of black people to be treated more-or-less like
human beings instead of livestock cost 600,000 dead. Under the
circumstances most would consider that to have been a noble and
utterly necessary sacrifice. The ones on the other side of that war,
the defeated, have a different opinion - as you might expect.

A war between left and right in America would probably have
minimally a million deaths, mostly from infrastructure and supply
chain failures: it's insulin supply problems not death squads that
would do most of the killing in most of those scenarios. About 3% of
Americans (as I recall) need regular medication to not die pretty
rapidly, and it doesn't take that much of a war to mess up those
pharmaceutical supply chains. And it could be far, far worse if
energy grids go down at an inconvenient time, or if National Guard
etc. armories get emptied out and the bad guys get hold of heavy
weapons.

So, yeah, I understand you think you have a right to live in Texas
with Federal protection against Texas's choice of law. But if Texas
decides - with their democratic mandate - that they've voted against
your idea of your rights being their idea of your rights...

How many Texas have to be killed to enforce your model of your
rights?

I think - while it is inconvenient and aggravating - the fact that
enormous numbers of geographically concentrated Americans want
different law and are voting for different law year after year
cannot be ignored. It's a democracy, and a huge voting bloc wants
something else.

We can either give it to them, and move everybody who chooses not to
live under that law. Or we can have a war, shed blood at vast scale,
rip open cultural wounds that won't heal for centuries, and force
our values on them at gunpoint as happened in the first Civil War.
And that's if the liberal side *wins* which is, frankly, ***not very
likely***. If it's open conflict, the 10 million American deer
hunters will swing mostly Republican, and you'll wind up with the
Coastal States of America barely holding their ground, or losing
outright in at least some scenarios. 

I should note that I was (at one point in my career) a failed states
specialist in military think tanks. These scenarios have haunted me
for 15 years. I've really thought this stuff through.

So the idea of simply letting the Texan make their own law on issues
which are currently a set of Federal issues seems like a pretty good
alternative. It *inconveniences* a lot of people, but it kills
(almost) nobody. It can be easily reversed as future generations of
Texans discover that banning abortion etc. really screws up your
society. It can be done in a way which permits California to have
hyper-progressive policies on pretty much everything, using the same
States Rights powers granted to Texas etc.

I know this is an ugly solution, I know a lot of people will be
harmed, but I think it could save the day.

Drugs, guns, abortion, LGBT issues - with a guaranteed right to
relocate to another state - could be pushed down to the State level
**and American life would go on, almost unchanged, for almost
everybody**.

It's the best offer on the table in most future scenarios. America
should take it.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #255 of 420: Patrick Lichty (plichty1) Tue 11 Jan 22 04:51

    
Samizdat from Almaty, provided by my friend Fatima Omir.

Despite the information lockdown, some Almaty civil activists were
able to set up an informal coordination headquarters in this crisis
situation. In particular, a list of problems for the residents of
the city was compiled, which was then handed over to authorities. By
the way, one of the first points was the problem that many people
ran out of balance on their phones, there was a problem with paying
and buying essential goods due to lack of availability, there was a
risk of food shortage Etc. etc. d. Surprisingly, on the first clause
the decision was made quickly and cellular operators were asked to
replenish the balances of their subscribers. But after the crisis
situation, there is still a lot of work to do. And, most
importantly, develop a clear anti-crisis action program for civil
society, so that in case of any force majeure situations, people
know what to do, where to turn, how to behave, how to help, etc. d.
According to recent events, the power vacuum has paralyzed the city
for days, but if the city's law and order system fails for various
reasons, then citizens must be connected to it so that, on the one
hand, tomorrow they did not feel like hostages to looters, bandits
and terrorists, or victims of intra-elite showdowns, ah, on the
other hand, did not create additional problems due to panic or lack
of information on what to do and how to behave. For example, the
process of creating voluntary friendships, which began to arise in
different parts of the city by the residents themselves, should
obtain legal status and become part of the city anti-crisis program.
By the way, in 2019, in my book "Vertical Deformation", I devoted
two chapters to anti-crisis management, including the need to create
a Center for Situation Modeling and Anti-crisis Management involving
civilian assets in Almaty. Stand. The book was then handed over to
the akim of Almaty B. To Sagintayev and other government officials.
But apparently they didn't even open it.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #256 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 11 Jan 22 05:20

    
So what's the state of the world?

The concept of democracy is fading. Governance throughout the world
is increasingly autocratic. The United States leads the trend. The
Biden presidency was a last gasp of the US Democratic party, which
will fade. Trumpist Republicans will rule by brute force, and the
United States will be dominated by far right white nationalist
leaders, including evangelical Christians who will insist that the
US be characterized as a Christian country, with other religions
marginalized and/or suppressed. Meanwhile increasingly heavy weather
events, driven my climate change and instability, will be the rule.
Insurance companies will be bankrupt by increasingly intense weather
events, seas will rise, people will be driven from their homes.
Infrastructure will be challenged and in some places collapse.
Public health organizations will lose support and be effectively
powerless, vaccinations will no longer be required by schools etc.,
diseases like smallpox, polio, measles etc. will spread unchecked,
Covid and flu will will continue to mutate and spread seasonally,
other pandemics will appear. Many will die, the human race will
start fading toward extinction.

Happy New Year!
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #257 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 05:33

    
JonL: Barbarism, not extinction.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #258 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 05:33

    <scribbled by hexayurt>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #259 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 11 Jan 22 06:30

    
Trend isn't destiny; the future is unwritten.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #260 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 11 Jan 22 06:30

    
I just got a third Covid vaccination.  I wonder how many more
needle-jabs this year will hold -- and this decade.

There was an interesting tipping point with this third shot because,
although it's important to have a vaccination, it's become even more
pressingly important to be registered in this European national
health system as *having legally received* this vaccination. 

 I could probably rustle up a Covid vaccination somewhere outside
the European Union, but it wouldn't help me much in my bureaucratic
daily life in Europe; if a European health system didn't give it to
me, they wouldn't be able to count it.  Although coronavirus drifts
aross borders with great speed and ease, health data doesn't, and
won't.  Global medical cooperation is vastly *worse* than it was
when the global pandemic started.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #261 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 11 Jan 22 06:31

    

The front-facing aspect of this situation is not my vaccination, or
the data registry of my vaccination, but rather the "Green Pass" QR
code, which is the visible emblem of my status.   If I have little
square of  black and white speckles on a phone, then I can move
around, get on planes, attend events, eat outside my home and so
forth.  If I lack this QR code validation -- my phone got wet, for
instance -- then I'm in trouble; I become unvaccinated underclass
and a visible health risk.

I haven't yet figured out if my old Green Pass QR code, which I
already possess, will continue to work (because it refers to my
upgraded vaccination database) or if they will issue an entirely
*new* QR code, which I have to download and install.  My wife's had
a clerical error once.  We had to jump through a lot of hoops, and
although she did get the QR code, she never successfully got the
phone software that surrounds it.

My Italian QR code application also has built-in Covid proximity
tracking, so if I fail to turn Bluetooth on in my phone, it
complains.  Once it told me that a guy five seats behind me on a
plane was sick.  Of course that bad news was useless to anybody, but
it showed that the application is functional (sort of).
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #262 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 11 Jan 22 06:31

    

Soon after our State of the World closes here on the WELL,  I'll be
travelling to Texas, which is seething with unheard-of amounts of
coronavirus.  And yet, the USA requires me to board a plane with a
certification that I myself don't have coronavirus.  This is a
near-comical allegation that they are in danger from me, instead of
me bravely plunging into an American maelstrom of disease, which is
what's actually going on.  

But, speaking in terms of diplomatic realpolitik, what can the USA
do?  Should they *apologize* to people arriving in the USA, and
explain that their health-care system is especially dangerous and
dysfunctional?  Everyone in Europe already knows that; it's the
state of the world, but not something that a nation-state can easily
admit.  "We're a superpower leper colony."  The cognitive dissonance
is too much to handle.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #263 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 11 Jan 22 06:32

    

These new biomedical border systems were built at great expense,
although (except in China, which excels at Great Firewalls) they
have signally failed at their purpose.  The Covid-tracking efforts
turned out to be about as effective as the Trump Border Wall, but,
much like the Trump Border Wall, it's too embarrassing to boldly
admit that they're Potemkin projects.   

My guess is that they pass into political legendry, as a new form of
biomedical security-theater.  Like the airport security that never
captures a terrorist, they will occasionally trap some unfortunate
person, in much the way that half-forgotten scissors and
pocketknives get vacuumed up at airports, for decades on end.

There's a lot of Green Pass protest in Europe, but that probably
won't affect the situation much, as nobody wants to be seen as
bowing the knee to Facebook antivax mobs.  There are rational
cost-benefit arguments to be made here, but nobody who could make
them would get a hearing over the wail of the ambulances.

So -- like a lot of important developments here in the 2020s -- it's
gonna change things a lot, worldwide, but not in a way that anybody
wants.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #264 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 11 Jan 22 06:34

    
I like Vinay's notion of Texas seceding; maybe they could join a
secessionist Scotland and start a Texo-Scottish oil-backed
cryptocurrency.

If haggis breakfast-tacos would work, it would all work.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #265 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 11 Jan 22 06:49

    
More likely Texas and the 24 other red states separating from the 25
blue states, breaking the USA in two. Or some other, more granular
balkanization creating chaos, confusion, and opportunity. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #266 of 420: Kevin Driscoll (driscoll) Tue 11 Jan 22 07:54

    
Comparing individual states (e.g., Texas v. California) seems to
miss some key geographic differences within the US: urban, suburban,
rural, dense, sprawling, sparse. I'm reminded that Texas went 47%
Democratic in the 2020 election. So what happens to Houston, San
Antonio, Dallas, Austin, El Paso, etc. in these
secessionist/federalist scenarios? Will all the cities of Texalberta
be empty?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #267 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 11 Jan 22 08:05

    
I think some of us are assuming that a Republican minority will
assert and sustain control by whatever means. Gerrymandering fixes
the local elections, and taking control of the infrastructure for
voting could fix the statewide elections. It's a good question how
an increasingly democratic populace will react to those shenanigans,
state my state and also at a national level. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #268 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 08:17

    
Eh, Bruce, half of America's problems are Scottish settlers
continuing to act like... well... Scottish people :) 

> "If haggis breakfast-tacos would work"...

I've had curried haggis more than once. It's pretty tasty. Why not?

So maybe an independent Texas, Scotland, Catalonia and a few of the
other really young countries could form some kind of a league.

https://kathrynanywhere.com/youngest-countries-world/
South Sudan.
Kosovo.
Montenegro and Serbia.
East Timor.
Palau.

Presumably they have a lot of shared problems working their way
through the massive bureaucratic apparatus? 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #269 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 08:19

    
((for context: I'm half-Scottish half-Indian and mostly grew up in
Scotland.))

https://dissidentvoice.org/Jan06/Bageant10.htm best thing ever
written on the Scottish national character and how it expresses in
America. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #270 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 08:33

    
Kevin,

My preferred scenario for fixing America is threefold.

1) Turn the big cities into States: Chicago, San Francisco, LA,
Chicago, Seattle and so on.

This helps sort out the Electoral College problems, without
annihilating it.

2) Push huge amounts of power over moral wedge issues down to the
States: drugs, guns, abortion, LGBT legal status.

This only works with Federal assistance to move people to a place
they want to live: we can't have people economically trapped in a
jurisdiction which just rolled back their civil rights.

3) Campaign finance reform, which Lawrence Lessig has worked on
extensively. 

I'm with him on all of this.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lawrence_Lessig#Money_in_politics_activism

Two bonus points.

4) Maybe retool the American military to run nuclear reactors on US
Concessions (like embassies, but large and industrial) in countries
that want to go green fast and don't want to use solar/wind for
whatever reason.

5) US-EU-CN climate pact - carbon accounting between these trade
blocs, so the Chinese CO2 footprint for making stuff for Americans
shows up in America, not China.

Not easy to do, but accurate carbon accounting is a prelude to
international treaties with real teeth.

Anyway, that's my manifesto.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #271 of 420: Axon (axon) Tue 11 Jan 22 08:41

    
>the fact that
enormous numbers of geographically concentrated Americans want
different law and are voting for different law year after year
cannot be ignored

They can be denied. Because this is atrocity. Majority rule does not
justify immoral law. That's why we have a Supreme Court. That's why
we must expand it to thirteen seats.

But the notion of Texas seceding is all rubbish anyway. Texas is
turning blue, and there's nothing the white plurality can do to stop
it. That's why they're thrashing around the deck like a gutshot
nurse shark; they know demographic mobility is coming for them on a
black horse. They're trying to get the genie (the permanent,
color-coded, underclass workforce) back in the bottle, and it ain't
going there.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #272 of 420: Ari Davidow (ari) Tue 11 Jan 22 09:26

    
Texas turning blue may rely on the Hispanic vote, and that, in turn,
is far from reliably for the Democrats - trending away, even.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #273 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 10:18

    
Axon: the tension between democracy and civil rights is a very real
thing. The Founding Fathers wasted no shortage of ink on it.

But... that's also heading into Civil War 2.0. That might be the
choice being made here. Vs. just agreeing to disagree, and waiting
20 years for the Republicans to catch up.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #274 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 11 Jan 22 10:21

    
love the bageant piece in #269. 'hillbilly elegy' touched on some of
this.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #275 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 11 Jan 22 11:58

    
While the competition to control the US federal government
continues, I don’t see it becoming civil war. Instead I expect to
see laws increasingly ignored, though selectively.

We’ve already seen this with drugs being legalized by the states.
They were never legalized at the federal level. It’s just that
everyone ignores that, except the banks, resulting in financial
inconvenience for marijuana growers and dispensaries. Presidents
have other things to do and they’re not going to spend any political
capital on fixing this.

During the pandemic, health authorities have lost prestige with
people of all political persuasions. At the start of this pandemic
it was mostly libertarians who had it in for the FDA but frustration
seems pretty general at this point? Even a middle-of-the-road guy
like Dave Barry is making fun of CDC guidelines now.

It’s fractal. The state authorities make their own rules when they
don’t like the CDC guidelines, and local governments do their own
thing, and often the citizens can’t even be bothered to find out
what the rules are.

Businesses have somewhat less leeway but if they can find a creative
interpretation then they might do their own thing too. Tesla was the
most high-profile scofflaw keeping its factory open at the start of
the pandemic but there were lots of businesses that quietly decided
that they’re “essential” and local governments decided they’re not
going to fight it.

If the Supreme Court lets the Texas anti-abortion law stand, maybe
the main consequence will be widespread drug trade in abortion
pills? Getting them by mail is legal now and even if it weren’t, it
would be hard to stop.

Americans are still somewhat law-abiding if you compare with other
countries. They still get upset when other people break traffic
laws, some of them anyway. But maybe we should be looking at less
lawful places to see how that can change?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #276 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 12:51

    
Erosion of rule of law is one of the critical aspects in failed
states. The folks who stand up for "what is right (tm)" are
extremely important to the overall functioning of society -
investigative journalists, honest cops, whistleblowers and so on.
When trust in the system collapses, and those people tend to stay
home or go missing, the system overall starts to fall apart.

Widespread flouting of the law by the States will accelerate US
decline far, far faster than a principled States Rights agenda will.

https://www.northatlanticbooks.com/blog/of-warlords-and-rodeos-why-nothing-wor
ks/
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #277 of 420: Tiffany Lee Brown (jonl) Tue 11 Jan 22 13:07

    
Via email from Tiffany Lee Brown:

Here we've been discussing the State of the World. Upcoming on
January 20, there will be a State of Democracy Summit available for
free online -- the subjects and panelists look very interesting. 

One panelist is formerly the active, charming, much-missed Well
member <zimby>, journalist Farai Chideya. One of the main sponsors
of the event is Craig Newmark Philanthropies. Craig was active on
The Well for years (another nice person we miss around here!) and is
founder of Craigslist.

<https://www.92y.org/state-of-democracy>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #278 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 11 Jan 22 13:13

    
thanx for posting this. but, sigh...
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #279 of 420: Angie Coiro (coiro) Tue 11 Jan 22 13:38

    
Man, I miss Farai. So much of this conversation I'd love to hear her
weigh in on!
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #280 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 11 Jan 22 13:52

    
> This is a
> near-comical allegation that they are in danger from me

They/we are in danger from you, just as you are from us. This
includes other people on the plane you take.

This isn't something to be smug about. Even with a booster your
vaccination isn't as reliable as we thought it was last spring.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #281 of 420: Axon (axon) Tue 11 Jan 22 15:03

    
>may rely on the Hispanic vote

May rely more on the urban/rural shift, which is trending favorably.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #282 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Tue 11 Jan 22 16:24

    
Vinay, I'm going to harsh parts of your manifesto. :-)

"Turn the big cities into States: Chicago, San Francisco, LA,
Chicago, Seattle and so on. This helps sort out the Electoral
College problems, without annihilating it."

Statehood for Puerto Rico or Washington, D.C. would largely do the
same thing, and seems more plausible. They each have large
constituencies for statehood already, and their governments,
particularly Puerto Rico already do many of the things that state
governments do. Badly, sometimes, but there's structure to build on.

This happened as recently as 1959 (the year my sister was born),
when Hawaii became a state, so there's a legislative structure for
it, while there's none for cities becoming states.

So will the Democrats kill the filibuster to enable this before the
mid-terms? Might Murkowski, Romney, Sasse and enough other
supposedly "good" Republicans  clear a view around the bulky
specters of Trump and sleazy Mitch McConnell to help? History
doesn't write the future, but there's precedent, a template, for
powerful federal voting rights laws and enforcement.

Meanwhile, why would states agree to let major cities secede? The NY
metro area generates the most economic activity of any other place
in both NYS and New Jersey. The San Francisco metro area is
apparently the sixth largest economy in the U.S. The Wikipedia
reports that "in 2016, the nine counties of the Chicago metropolitan
area accounted for 77.3% of the state's total wages, with the
remaining 93 counties at 22.7%."

"Push huge amounts of power over moral wedge issues down to the
States: drugs, guns, abortion, LGBT legal status. This only works
with Federal assistance to move people to a place
they want to live: we can't have people economically trapped in a
jurisdiction which just rolled back their civil rights."

This would be a tragedy. How many Black or brown or impoverished
white people do you think this society would relocate this way? What
kind of traumas would people endure while trying to get out? What
happens when, as does happen fairly regularly, New York or
Massachusetts or Maine or New Jersey elects a Republican governor?

What about American Indians living on or near reservations: so so
many in states that have gone full-on conservative wingnut? Those
are either their traditional territories or what they managed to
claw out for themselves after being forcibly relocated in the 18th
and 19th centuries. It's taken the land disappearing from under
them, due to climate-change driven ice melt and coastal erosion, for
some Alaska Native villages to try and move inland from their
ancestral villages.

The Democrats can't even get all their members to acknowledge that
federal paid family and medical leave would be a clear economic win.
So it's hard to imagine any Congress is going to pay to relocate
millions to different states.  

That only seems to happen when states or feds see the economic logic
of removing homes after flooding disasters – which doesn't seem to
happen often. New York State bought out dozens of coastal homes on
Staten Island in the wake of Sandy – people who got little to help
over the prior decades that their neighborhoods flooded regularly.
FEMA relocated many people living along the Mississippi after the
Great Flood of 1994.

Campaign finance reform could happen, conceivably.

Very few countries are gonna let the U.S. Pentagon run nuclear power
plants on their territory. An enduring American military presence is
termed "occupation" by a lot of these people. Some of use felt
comforted or relieved when the Pentagon typically sided with
American democracy over fascism during the Trump years. I'd argue
this was norm that underlined just how quickly and thoroughly Trump
and his operatives knocked down most norms.

Generally, I don't think we can assume the military is much or any
more competent at making the best choices, or even most humane, when
it comes to managing complicated and expensive projects. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #283 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 16:29

    
So Bruce, I want to come back to the biopolitics: the app you *must*
have installed, and which *must* have its bluetooth on.

I'm thinking here of Apple's airtags - I don't know how you tell
your iPhone not to pass GPS data to Apple when your phone comes
within range of a lost object with an airtag on it.

A pervasive network which reports on us whenever two or more are
gathered together. And I'm wearing an Apple Watch, which streams
who-knows-what to who-knows-where.

That sort of sounds like we're building the capability, over the
next few years, to simultaneously watch the beating hearts hundreds
of millions of people scattered all over the world.

I don't know what that is. It's some kind of bizarre biopolitical
panopticon: we can't see the whole world but we know where the
people are and we know how they feel from their biological
indicators. We have their DNA from all the PCR tests - unless I'm
very much mistaken they're going to sequence all the DNA in those
samples including the human DNA? I might be wrong about that.

Anyway it's just a very weird event: the breaking through of
computers into the biological domain on some epic scale. We got
invaded by a virus, but it brought a new era of digitization in its
wake.

What *is* that? Does it even have a name?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #284 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 17:04

    
Emily Gertz: I used to carry a business card that said "I don't get
out of bed for less than one percent mortality."

If I was going back into that business today, my card would say "bad
solutions for insoluble problems."

Once you put civil war on the table as the possible outcome of *not*
letting the Red States have a lot more control of their destinies,
the minor aggravations of relocating a lot of people become a lot
more acceptable.

I don't know that there *will* be a civil war in the US. It's reeked
of civil war / failed states to me since maybe 2007, when I first
started writing about pushing the Wedge Issues down to the State
level and moving people around to handle the civil rights impacts.
But I'm also a noted catastrophist: I worked on a lot of things that
never happened, and a few that did!

https://www.nytimes.com/2022/01/03/books/review-how-civil-wars-start-barbara-w
alter.html

I don't know of another implementable alternative to the US running
the *risk* of civil war. I think if a concrete plan was put on the
table to give the Wedge Issues back to the States, pretty much all
the fire would go out of the pro civil war faction - they'd be
getting most of what they want without the risk of having AC130
Ghostriders circling over American skies.

As an alternative to war, the logistical and humanitarian issues you
raise seem pretty minor. 

Is moving people around expensive? Sure. Cheaper than war.

Are the Native Americans potentially going to get screwed again?
Sure. Happens over and over again, they've had a terrible ride,
maybe they get screwed again.

But *as an alternative to war* these are trivial prices to pay.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ADdToI9Akw&t=570s this is footage
from the Bundy ranch standoff in 2014. It's notable because an armed
group of ranchers force a group of rifle-bearing police back down
the road.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ADdToI9Akw&t=540s there used to be
close up footage of this conversation, where Officer Friendly, a
very paramilitary-looking police officer, is persuaded that it's
time for him and his men to go home.

These guys, the snipers, are on the overpass behind the overpass you
can see the crowd at. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AhNFqaLioD4
there were several of them, serious looking sniper dudes,
overlooking the entire situation. If a firefight had ensued the
police would have been massacred.

At the time, the rumour was that a couple of police counter snipers
had been politely disarmed and walked out of the situation.

America is *knee deep* in people who are capable of pulling off this
kind of stuff. They've got the guns, they've got military training
(veterans) or they've been trained by people who had military
training, they're extraordinarily numerous - ten million deer
hunters make acceptable infantry in many scenarios.

The potential for a firestorm of violence in America is very real,
and I do not see either democrats or republicans looking for
off-ramps. What I see is people ignoring the warning signs of
potential impending doom - much as they ignore climate change - and
crossing their fingers it all sort of works out.

I'm not saying pushing the Wedge Issues down to the States wouldn't
cause problems. I'm not saying people wouldn't die - 20 million
people driving to new homes, some of them are going to die in car
accidents they would not otherwise have had at the very least - but
in terms of *stopping the risk of widespread political violence in
America* I don't know of a better credible solution right now.

And I'd say the same about nuclear power, if solar wasn't getting
cheaper so incredibly fast. 

Thank god for that.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #285 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Tue 11 Jan 22 17:37

    
No convictions for walking the police off the land at gunpoint
https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2018/jan/08/bundy-family-charges-dropped-n
evada-armed-standoff

And a reasonably insightful piece about militia iconography 
https://popula.com/2019/02/24/about-face/

You can see a militia column working its way through the Jan6 crowd
in the first few seconds of this video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JiMEmgUf9EE

There's a lot more footage of those guys around. If you watch the
crowds carefully in the Jan6 footage, there are a fair number of
anomalous actors - a low key, faces covered, fast moving two man
team who are in and out of the building in minutes, that sort of
thing. There was a *lot* of action on the day.

To briefly to forestall the standard arguments:

1) Lightly armed militias in Iraq and Afghanistan ground the US
military to a standstill. Combined population is 80 million, 25% of
the size of the US. Militias on US soil would be larger, more
heavily armed, better trained, and US personnel would be unlikely to
treat them as a faceless enemy: expect a lot of tipoffs about when
the bombs are going to start falling over Huston.

Also don't assume that the Russians, Chinese etc. wouldn't run
shoulder launched surface to air missiles and assorted other goodies
into the conflict areas, and also provide satellite etc.
reconnaissance. 

2) I'm not saying this *will* happen. I'm saying this *could*
happen. It's a realistic risk: a large scale Civil War 2 is possible
and a lot of people in America (on all sides) are actively planning
and preparing for it, all of which makes it more likely.

Bringing the temperature on that conflict down means giving the
potential insurgents some of what they want politically, *or*
treating their leadership like union organizers in banana republics,
and having the CIA round them up, shoot them, and bury them out in
the desert.

I'd rather negotiate than see this go kinetic, risk millions of
deaths, risk the death of the US democracy if the coasts lose, and
possibly the loss of global democracy (and any hope of international
climate treaties) right behind that.

This is super high stakes. Maybe we need to figure out how to give
these people more of what they want, in areas where a compromise can
be reached, before the craziness escalates and the shooting might
start.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #286 of 420: Paul Belserene (paulbel) Tue 11 Jan 22 18:40

    
>the minor aggravations of relocating a lot of people

I glitched on this. There were aggravations in relocating a lot of
people when India and Pakistan became independent. The aggravations
were arguably anything but minor.

And then when you consider the situations of working class young
women and girls seeking reproductive health support RIGHT AWAY, the
aggravation of moving to another state - and then staying there? -
is not in any way minor. 

I get that you're talking big picture, but the amount of suffering
involved in devolving power to the states is beyond the capability
of my pocket calculator.

My first choice would be Lincoln's, all over again.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #287 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 11 Jan 22 18:47

    
When you have to go into debt to sell your house, relocation is a
major, life-changing aggravation.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #288 of 420: Axon (axon) Tue 11 Jan 22 19:05

    
>I'm saying this *could*
happen

Well, anything could. But it still seems incalculably remote. I
don't think appeasement is a useful strategy, though.

You can't give them "a little bit of what they want"; wha they want
is a patriarchal white ethostate. Politically and logistically
infeasible.

The various authors dining out on the fashionable ominous warnings
about impending civil war don't even think it would be a war in any
conventional sense, but rather more of a Northern Ireland during the
Troubles model. Tragic, yes, but still a parochial conflict touching
relatively few. Prosecuting such a conflict seems infinitely
preferable to tolerating atrocity in exchange for -- what's that
phrase? -- peace in our time. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #289 of 420: Mario Tennon (mct67) Tue 11 Jan 22 20:47

    <scribbled by mct67 Tue 11 Jan 22 20:59>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #290 of 420: Mario Tennon (mct67) Tue 11 Jan 22 21:16

    <scribbled by mct67 Tue 11 Jan 22 22:57>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #291 of 420: Paul Belserene (paulbel) Tue 11 Jan 22 21:24

    
The analogies that are being offered are, yes, analogies, but at the
bottom of this is the undeniable fact that the separate state are
not actually able to subsist as they are without the help of the
entire federal government.  It's the same in Canada with its "have"
and "have not" provinces. 

If the states are given their head, do they get from the federal
government more than they put in? And if not, which states can
survive?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #292 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Wed 12 Jan 22 02:31

    
Paul Belserene: 

So let's think about what the social compact changes are.

Firstly, remember, pre-1913 no income tax. Federal government had
very limited tax raising powers, around 5% of its current budget.
Most of the tax burden for running society was on States and
municipalities, and was things like property taxes and sales taxes,
not income taxes. The income tax was what turned America into a
"proper country" with a powerful executive capable of prosecuting
foreign wars and making social policy: prior to that, FedGov was
poor.

Secondly, most Americans have been getting poorer in real terms
since the 1970s. A lot poorer: the dollar has lost a ton of its
value, wages have stagnated, wealth has concentrated. An enormous
number of Americans are just plain broke or permanently in debt,
across all social classes. The wealth came from winning WW2, with
the nuke: nobody was going to tell the Americans no, and the people
who did got zapped by the CIA with relative impunity. Plus a huge
and undamaged manufacturing and industrial base. I seem to remember
70% of the world's trucks and highways were in America.

So as the rest of the world catches up America starts to feel poorer
and poorer in comparison. The comparative advantage dissipates, the
rich use their power to change the rules to keep them rich, and the
poor pay the price. US healthcare is the core of this mess, but
education is a close second: people are being treated like cattle.

People are very, very bad at getting poorer gracefully. So from my
perspective this is the macro-story: fifty years of imperial
decline, and only 100 years of Federal government in its current
form: it really only comes into existence with the income tax.

This equilibrium - huge Federal government, and economic decline -
is wha the Right are complaining about above all other things.
They're *dramatically* less interested in race, and *more interested
in money* than people give them credit for: they'd be as happy
enslaving the Irish as the African Americans, if the law would let
them. Poverty makes people monsters, and agriculture is a curse for
those who work the land. This is what we have to work with...

(oop, out of time, more later)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #293 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 12 Jan 22 02:56

    
Interesting news on the Chinese front.  Xi Jinping decided that
computer games were bad for kids; "spiritual opium," made them lazy
and neglecting their analog engineering.  Those gamers are 'lying
flat,' they're 'touching fish,' they're not participating the
'national rejuvenation.'

So, they just stopped licensing games.  You can create games in
China, but you can't register and sell them.  Game studios are going
broke all over China.  Xi doesn't just attack Baudi Alibaba Tencent
Big Tech oligarch,  he's also happy to choke the little guys --  the
"tigers and flies," as they say in Chinese anti-corruption
campaigns.

https://www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3161717/china-gaming-crackdown-freeze
-new-video-game-licences-extends-2022


I don't think Xi ever wants the game business to come back.  I
suspect he has games figured as premonitions of the Metaverse, which
is an awful fever-dream that a proper civilization just shouldn't
have.

Xi is by no means a Luddite, mind you: Xi loves Chinese Artificial
Intelligence, Chinese moon colonies, he can't get enough of military
hardware.

Xi Jinping is 68 years old (and so am I).  I wonder how many years
as a baton-swinging autocrat this Emperor can possibly have left in
him.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #294 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 12 Jan 22 03:06

    

*The Kazakh regime has got it together to have a parliamentary
meeting and a formal policy announcement (thoughfully translated
into English for the sake of us offshored voyeurs).

https://www.gov.kz/memleket/entities/mfa-strasbourg/press/news/details/311251?
lang=en

"President Tokayev confirmed that perpetrators of violence took
advantage of public discontent with the increase of liquefied gas
price. Initially, peaceful rallies against the rise of gas price
took place in a number of regions. Then, peaceful protests were
hijacked by bandits, looters, and armed terrorists, including
foreign militants. The perpetrators’ key goal is clear – they aimed
at destruction of government institutions, undermining of the
constitutional order, and, ultimately, the seizure of power in
Kazakhstan.

"Facing an unprecedented armed aggression by terrorists, Kazakhstan
had to request for assistance from its partners at the Collective
Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) and deployment of an
international peacekeeping contingent. By today, the main mission of
the CSTO peacekeeping force has been successfully completed. A
phased withdrawal from Kazakhstan of the entire CSTO peacekeeping
contingent will begin in two days and will take no more than 10 days
in total."

*Are those CSTO peacekeepers really gonna shoulder arms, wrap their
flags and march out of Kazakhstan, "Mission Accomplished"?  Doing
that in an oil-patch is practically unheard-of, but I guess it
worked for Kuwait once.  Sort of.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #295 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 12 Jan 22 03:07

    <scribbled by bruces Wed 12 Jan 22 03:09>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #296 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 12 Jan 22 03:12

    
*Along with the imported sticks from the CSTO, the President is
offering the restive Kazakh  population a rather extensive selection
of carrots.

"The Government will make a special effort to address the issues of
economic inequality in Kazakhstan. It will ensure that incomes of
all groups of population grow at pace with the growth of the
national economy.
Within two months, the Government and the Chamber of Entrepreneurs
will develop a programme to increase the income of the general
public and will prepare concrete proposals to reduce poverty in
Kazakhstan.

"The Government will promptly develop a new Social Code. The
Government must adapt its social policies to the new reality, taking
into account the challenges of the Covid pandemic and all other
problems. The Social Code should become a key element of the new
“social contract” in Kazakhstan...

"A special fund “For the People of Kazakhstan” will be established
to support Kazakh citizens at the time of need. The fund will be
fully transparent and accountable to the public. Its funding will
come from private and public sources."

*Will these promised bribes mellow  out the riotous population?   I
have my doubts, because I don't think the locals believe this will
happen, but, well,  maybe they won't become Syria or Afghanistan. 
Kazakhstan is by no means Shangri-La, but not becoming Syria or
Afghanistan, that would be almost a victory condition in MMXXII.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #297 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Wed 12 Jan 22 06:24

    
I wonder what the Chinese video game ban will do to their birth rate?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #298 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Wed 12 Jan 22 06:31

    
And, can I note just how radical a piece of social engineering a
video game ban is? That's an *extremely* deep reshaping of the
forces shaping the young: it's turning those kids into different
people.

Raising their kids like our billionaires do?

https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/tech-billionaire-parents-limit/
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #299 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 12 Jan 22 07:02

    <scribbled by jonl Wed 12 Jan 22 07:02>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #300 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 12 Jan 22 07:03

    
I suspect a video game ban in the USA would result in mass suicide
or worse.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #301 of 420: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Wed 12 Jan 22 08:10

    
@bruces 260:

"I could probably rustle up a Covid vaccination somewhere outside
the European Union, but it wouldn't help me much in my bureaucratic
daily life in Europe; if a European health system didn't give it to
me, they wouldn't be able to count it.  Although coronavirus drifts
aross borders with great speed and ease, health data doesn't, and
won't.  Global medical cooperation is vastly *worse* than it was
when the global pandemic started."

It's actually better, but weirder, than that. In France, you can get
your California covid QR converted into an EU QR for 50 euros at a
pharmacy. Same in Germany, but I think it's 30 EUR. If you have a QR
from Washington state or a few other US states that embraced an
international standard, you can just use your QR in the EU. UK
passes work in the EU, too.

Some EU countries, like .pl and .nl, won't recognize US proof of vax
- either the card or the QR - but they WILL recognize a US-to-EU
proof of vax that you get in Germany or France.

In Poland, the restaurateurs I encountered looked at my paper CDC
covid card and shrugged and admitted me (but I was in Katowice for a
UN conference, so there were a lot of foreign proof-of-vax
credentials being presented). In the Netherlands, I had to book and
take a free LFT/antigen test every day, results from which included
a GUID that I could enter into the Dutch covid pass app and get a
24h QR code.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #302 of 420: QR eye (doctorow) Wed 12 Jan 22 08:16

    
@bruces 261

"If I lack this QR code validation -- my phone got wet, for
instance -- then I'm in trouble; I become unvaccinated underclass
and a visible health risk."

Again, not quite right. Your Green Pass is delivered as a paper QR
code that you scan into your national QR pass app, which then
generates a(nother?) QR code you can present by showing your phone
instead of the paper. 

But you can present the paper one, or a photo of it. When my fam was
in France, we each took pictures of the others' paper QRs and kept
them on our phones in case someone had a tech problem, we could
present their credential for them. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #303 of 420: Jamais Cascio (jonl) Wed 12 Jan 22 09:48

    
Via email from Jamais Cascio:

Hi folks

Good to see so many old friends and colleagues here. I’m glad we’re
all still fighting to understand what’s going on, and fighting to
hold on to what’s worth saving. It’s hard to keep that fighting
spirit going, sometimes.

I spoke in Kazakhstan about a decade ago. At the time, Nazarbayev
was still President, and the cult of personality was overpowering: a
bronze pillar with his handprint at the peak of the “Baytarek” tower
in the center of Astana; paintings of him everywhere, looking
lovingly at his people; young translators/guides/watchers gushing
about how “the President is such a genius” and “he even wrote our
national anthem!”

That, and the underside of the cars we were shuttled around in being
checked for bombs every time we entered or exited a parking lot.

It’s not all that surprising to me that there’s growing unrest
there. An impoverished population, living with infrastructure
(outside the big city) looking like it was stuck in the aftermath of
a regional war, while the leadership had increasingly gaudy
structures — buildings and monuments — filling the capital. An
economy based on extraction of raw materials that were already
rapidly losing value. Atop all of this was an environment that was
little-cared-for: at the largest scale, the disappearance of the
Aral Sea; at the smallest, the casual way the translators/guides
would toss garbage out the car window as we toured the countryside.
The only surprise to me was that the unrest took this long to
emerge.

I haven’t been following the discussion this year as closely in
years past. Not because of the content or participants — I have
enormous respect and admiration of so many of you here — but because
the state of the world is so deeply depressing. The work that I do
is drowning in the reality of collapsing systems. Still, as noted
above, we keep fighting to hold on to what’s worth saving. Thank you
for that.

-Jamais
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #304 of 420: fruitbagpangolin (jonl) Wed 12 Jan 22 09:50

    
Via email from fruitbatpangolin:

The viewing of Sneakers following the recent death of Sydney Poitier
after the deep state finally hunted him down at the young age of 94,
has taken longer than I anticipated. Largely due to a massive
landlady incursion within the venue chosen, powered demonically by
her exuberant consumption of some 21st century street modern
nightmare fuel consisting, apparently, of hard spirits, valium,
cheap wine, and weak ketamine.

That situation is now largely quelled. Primarily due to the efforts
of a friend, an expert in the role of idiot-whisperer. And the
rescreening of Sneakers went well. Now what have I missed here?

*scans thread*

*slips into NBC suit, carefully checking every seal*

Soooo.

Nuclear: I heartily agree with both Michael Bravo, and Vinay Gupta.

Vinay reminded me, with his 'worst idea I have ever had', of a
conversation I had years ago with someone from the US Navy.
Basically, the US Navy are the only organisation I have ever heard
of that deals with its own nuclear power reactors in a way that is
anything close to that which you would like to expect from a
civilian municipal nuclear power generation supplier. Possibly
because they have a habit of living on them, whilst out at sea. I
suggested that, because of this, it might be a good thing if the US
Navy militarily seceded itself, from the United States, and then set
itself up as an international NGO, finally free from all that
troublesome Washington interference, free to go sail the high seas,
provide nuclear power generation to all, and shoot at anyone who
comes near it.

I was expecting some pushback on this, but given the suprisingly
enthusiastic response I got to the suggestion, I'm not sure it would
be that difficult to pull off. The other branches might get a bit
annoyed.

The essential problem is that whatever the real risks may or may not
be, politics is not engineering. You cannot utilise something as
baseload power for a global energy technology problem, that you are
not also publicly willing to allow any geopolitical adversaries to
use. Lithium and silicon are hyperabundant and simply do not carry
the same political risk. Though I'd like to see mini self-regulating
molten salt reactors built into floating arcology skyscraper
basements. From experience, the problem with nuclear power is not
the technology, it is the current culture of the industry, combined
with the weapons politics. Wanna use nulcear? solve those.

Biological: Lets all sing the doom song (
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nw_cdqQHGA8 )

The anthropocene is still accelerating
<https://www.bimco.org/news/market_analysis/2021/20210601_dry_bulk_shipping>, and if you ignore the PR and concentrate on the numbers, quite frankly my dear, we're fucked. The climate curve is consistently topping the worst of the IPCC expectations, which means, at least quite likely, that we are on a very different, and sharper curve, to the worst of the IPCC projections. Things that my dad thinks are worrying, but still thinks will take centuries, may take decades. And if that happens, without some kind of explosion in personal fremen-tech, billions are going to have to move rather quickly. From that perspective, the current destabilising fall of the US and the UK may actually help in this regard.

Chemical: Chemistry is our best bet at a technical out, from a
current engineering and politics standpoint. Our batteries and solar
panels might not be perfect, but nothing is, and if you run out of
lithium and silicon, you get a special award from the Galactic High
Council for ingenious stupidity.

Also, if lines of communication and geography can be suitably
organised, up for that drink with <loris>.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #305 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 12 Jan 22 09:59

    
ah, thanks <fruitbatpangolin>. i live rural santa cruz county, USA
(nothing really matters but the view of monterey bay is great).

what is 'frementech'?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #306 of 420: Ron Sires (rsires) Wed 12 Jan 22 10:21

    
I would guess "frementech" is a reference to the technology, such as
still-suits and crysknives, used by the Fremen people in the Dune
universe.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #307 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 12 Jan 22 11:07

    
ah, not a dune fellow traveler.

i thought this protocol article on crypto communists was useful:

https://www.protocol.com/fintech/crypto-communists
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #308 of 420: Tiffany Lee Brown (jonl) Wed 12 Jan 22 12:10

    
Tiffany suggested that we post a link to this article by my pal
Ethan Zuckerman, in the Atlantic:
<https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2021/10/facebook-metaverse-was-
always-terrible/620546/>

It's about creating a text-based metaverse back in the day, using a
technology called MOO, for "multiuser object-oriented" virtual
reality. We did something similar here in Austin, creating a MOO for
a LAN demonstration set up by EFF-Austin for Robofest Austin back in
the 90s, instigated by Doug Barnes. Doug was a systems administrator
back then; since then, he became a tech-focused attorney based in
New York.

The LAN was set up with computers and much help from Steve Jackson
Games. Steve was so excited about the gaming potential of the MOO
that he made it a subscription service, and attached it to
Illuminati Online or io.com, which was one of the earliest
commercial ISPs. The MOO was a cool environment - we built a
FringeWare building in it. I recall that there was a text-based
marker you could sniff, and it would make you virtually high.

Probably more interesting than anything Facebook will come up with -
but it didn't survive, though io.com succeeded for a long time as an
ISP.

From Ethan's piece:

"The MOO was really cool, in theory. Most people weren’t building
HTML-enabled multiplayer spaces in 1995. It got us our first round
of venture-capital funding, demonstrating to our investors that we
weren’t just kids translating mutual-fund propaganda into HTML. We
were technology innovators. We were building things no one had ever
seen before.

"But here’s the thing: The MOO was garbage. On a good day, I could
give a demo that made it look smooth, slick, and fun to use. But our
CEO couldn’t. And that was a problem. It wasn’t his fault. The MOO
was buggy and quirky and demanded that you think of the world as a
set of six-sided cubes made up of webpages. Our boss pulled the plug
on the project, telling us, 'I know it’s the future, but if I can’t
use it, I can’t sell it to investors.'"
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #309 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 12 Jan 22 12:43

    
If you're interested text game nostalgia you might take a look at
the "Fifty Years of Text Games" substack. The author's gimmick is
that he reviewed one text game for each year between 1971 and 2020:

<https://if50.substack.com/archive?sort=new>

He's writing a book, but made the archives free for a week. (It's
been more than a week, but it seems he hasn't turned the paywall
back on yet.)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #310 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 12 Jan 22 12:58

    
Banning video game *companies* isn't quite the same as banning
games. I don't know anything about the scene in China, but there are
plenty of open source game projects out there, built as labors of
love. They are overshadowed by commercial games, but if the
commercial games went away, they'd probably get a lot more interest.

I wonder if we'll see more of those sort of games from China? Maybe
some "lying flat" people might decide to get into programming in
their copious spare time? The laid off game developers could help
them get them started.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #311 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 12 Jan 22 13:13

    
China also cracked down on tutoring companies this year:

<https://www.sixthtone.com/news/1008838/chinas-tutoring-ban-leaves-a-trail-of-d
ebt%2C-anger%2C-and-broken-dreams>

> The Chinese government launched a severe clampdown on private
tutoring, blaming the industry for fueling an unhealthy educational
rat race. Academic classes on weekends and holidays were banned.
Education firms were prevented from opening new centers or raising
capital. From January 2022, all for-profit academic tutoring would
be outlawed.

This is terrible for the teachers, but I expect that studying for
exams will continue?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #312 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 12 Jan 22 13:23

    
From a social science point of view, the heavy-handed ban on
for-profit tutoring seems like an unusual natural experiment. Should
we expect that the Chinese public will be less educated without the
for-profit tutoring companies, and how could anyone tell?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #313 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 12 Jan 22 13:31

    
Meanwhile, it's another good year for California state budgets:

<https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2022-01-12/with-gusher-of-tax-revenue
s-gavin-newsom-politics-of-plenty-california-budget?_amp=true>

> Newsom’s more than $286-billion budget proposal for 2022-23,
unveiled Monday, follows the unconventional model that has become a
hallmark of his governing style and drawn some criticism — bucking
the approach of his predecessors, who narrowed their focus to a few
signature policies. Instead, the 54-year-old Democrat has become a
governor who “swings at every pitch,” as he often describes the
critique of his wide-ranging agenda.

> His plan includes a mix of high-profile proposals sure to grab
attention, such as the expansion of Medi-Cal eligibility to all
immigrants and a call for the state to manufacture insulin, and
others to more quietly bolster the safety net and chip away at
California’s problems.

> The governor is proposing $1.2 billion over two years for forest
health and fire prevention and suggests offering incentives for
developers to build housing in downtown areas, in hopes of
discouraging the kind of suburban sprawl into forests that has put
new homes in the path of wildfires.

You'd think we'd be happier in California, with a mostly-unified
government and plenty of money? Instead we worry about the federal
level.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #314 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Wed 12 Jan 22 14:10

    
<292> seriously misrepresents US socio/political/economic history
since World War II. US workers lost much of what they'd gained since
the establishment of the New Deal because purveyors of the
neoliberal consensus gained power and cut taxes. This created a
powerful oligarchy that now can use huge campaign donations to
protect their wealth at the expense of the rest of the populace.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #315 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 13 Jan 22 04:43

    
I'm spending most of the day managing my biopolitical QR codes so as
to fly from Italy to Spain.  Normally I tote around four different
speckled squares just to clear through through airports, but for
this trip I've got two duplicates of one, and I don't need to seem
one of the other.

If I were as clever as Cory Doctorow, I'd master all the thorny
details and hack my travel situations much better, but, alas, I'm
indolent.  Also, if you excel at swift compliance, it just
encourages them.  Before the pandemic a trip from Turin to Ibiza was
a spontaneous weekend jaunt.  Before 9/11 you could haul a toolbox.

Here's a cynical guide to making  money in the NFT racket without
having to swallow any of the koolaid.  It's written entirely in NFT
jargon, and in a handy listicle form.

https://mirror.xyz/nnimrodd.eth/s4gU0NnIEFBnM0wKcCXyWAcyNHl94ooLCs5RHWdnBiY

"Never get attached to a pfp—they’re just a bunch of traits.

"Ignore a pfp project if all animals look the same.

"List everything at 2 ETH above floor. Sell and buy the floor again,
in perpetuity.

"Never de-list, unless it’s to re-list at a higher price. Listed
items are less likely to get stolen...."
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #316 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 13 Jan 22 05:11

    
*In surveillance capitalism, "you are the product"; in Web3, you're
the "exit liquidity." 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #317 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Thu 13 Jan 22 07:20

    
Hello, Jamais. Thanks for that note. Honestly, when jonl asked me if
I wanted to be a SOTW guest this year, I told him I was on as much
of a news hiatus as possible for a working journalist. The gears
haven't completely stopped turning though, it seems.

Vinay, I know this is primarily a thought experiment. Black humor
and irony are perfectly reasonable responses to the current state of
the world – not that anyone needs my approval. 

For myself, I don't have it in me lately to be glib about how much
mortality needs to happen before it's worth getting my mind out of
bed. Frankly it's a sad regression to my mindset in my 20s, when I
was working for PIRG and Greenpeace and everything was So Very
Serious. Maybe I'll snap out of it (again) someday.

"Once you put civil war on the table as the possible outcome of
*not*
letting the Red States have a lot more control of their destinies,
the minor aggravations of relocating a lot of people become a lot
more acceptable."

Maybe it'd be cheaper than war, but that's never stopped the U.S.
from going to war before.

White supremacy is a fundamentally unreasonable belief system. White
panic is based on such extreme bigotry that it leads people to deny
themselves economic and social well being just to avoid sharing it
with non-whites. 

If these millions of racists were still paying taxes to the federal
government, and that money could end up benefiting Black, Hispanic,
Latino, Indigenous, Jewish or Muslim or LGBTQ or etc. objectionable
people, most still wouldn't be appeased by moving "those people" a
few states away.

There's no reason to assume that "blue state" Republicans are
benign, either: Chris Christie may have seemed pretty good, but
that's only by comparison to the Greg Abbots and Ron DeSantises.
Maine's recent former governor, climate denier and bigot Paul
LePage, now calls himself "Trump before Trump."

In a scenario like Maine's, where Democrat Janet Miller is now the
governor, would we move all the relocated Mainers back to Maine?
Would the Republicans then be discharged from the state? 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #318 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 13 Jan 22 08:23

    
Instead of assuming civil war we could talk about an increase in
violence and what forms it could take.

It's not clear that angry Americans  are ready to be or to support
guerillas? Gangs are sometimes a thing. There was the ritual
violence of protesters versus the police in Portland. January 6 was
among other things a sort of imitation of a protest. Many people on
both sides seemed to be expecting things to go the way protests
usually go, and were surprised when it didn't.

Meanwhile there is the stochastic violence of loners that we see in
school shootings and the like.

There seems to be precedent for American acceptance and tolerance of
higher levels of violence without society breaking down? Consider
bombings in the 1970's and the drug war.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #319 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 13 Jan 22 08:46

    
The 2022 and 2024 elections in the USA could be breaking points, or
at least points where protest and violence accelerate. Regardless
who wins those elections, there'll be trouble. Currently, it appears
that the Republicans are seizing the elections apparatus so that
they can direct the results of the election, and if they appear to
be deciding the elections regardless of the actual vote counts, I
expect an explosive reaction.

Though if Republicans have partisans running the elections, in the
unlikely event that Democrats appear to win, I'm not clear how they
can protest, other than in states where the elections continue to be
run by bipartisans.  
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #320 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 13 Jan 22 09:10

    
*So, you're Chinese Big Tech, and you like cool surveillance
algorithms that transform your users into the product? Too bad!  The
Party won't allow those for ethical reasons: they cause users to
“become addicted or spend too much.”

*Xi Jinping has got the only computer-ethics scheme that has teeth. 
It's Xi Jinping Thought ethics with vaguely Confucian
"Market-Leninist" characteristics, but he doesn't kid around about
it when it comes to making the subjects bend the knee.

https://mailchi.mp/a2255ec01dff/un-effort-to-ban-killer-robots-falls-short-chi
na-to-impose-restrictions-on-algorithms-and-intel-lands-in-hot-water-over-xinj
iang-reference?e=c54d18d20f



China Rolls Out New Algorithm Rules: Last week, Chinese regulators
finalized new rules on the use of algorithmic recommendation
systems. The regulations (translation available here), which were
proposed last August, place significant limits on the tech
companies’ content recommendation algorithms and give users the
ability to opt out or limit their use of the systems. 

The new law, set to go into effect on March 1, will:

Require companies to display information about how the algorithms
work and their intended purpose.

Give users the ability to opt out of using algorithmic
recommendation systems entirely, opt out of personalized
recommendation systems specifically, or delete personalized tags
used by algorithms to make individual recommendations.  

Place limits on models that cause users to “become addicted or spend
too much.”

Bar algorithms that “generate or synthesize fake news information,”
(a new addition since the draft regulations).
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #321 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 13 Jan 22 09:15

    
Emily: "I don't get out of bed for less than 1% mortality" was
literally *printed on my business cards* for years when I was doing
worst case scenarios work. Mordant sense of humor, yes, but it was
also literally true - I did not work on scenarios which weren't
going to kill at least 80 million people, or 1% of the country they
happened in, generally. 

That's given me a certain perspective. Working directly with
mortality at scale - "if you want to know the truth, count the
bodies in the morgues - and in the streets" - is a brutal practice.
But it grounds us in reality, the certainty of death (and taxes)
more than almost any other way of knowing the truth: can be
depressing as hell, or can be liberating. To fight death is futile,
at least for a while longer, but to *know* death is bountiful and
creative. Life-death chiaroscuro.

As a failed state guy, a former planner, I am *grimly afraid* about
what I see in America. I'm trying to sensitize people to a
"Yugoslavia scenario" possibility: Capitalism starts to collapse as
Communism once did and a civil war follows.

I am afraid. And when I am afraid, everybody should be afraid. I
startle easily - I'm very risk-aware, risk-alert - but very little
genuinely frightens me.

American civil war genuinely frightens me.

https://www.advocate.com/commentary/2018/3/29/christian-takeover-us-military
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #322 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 13 Jan 22 09:23

    
So what I'm proposing, if it happened in another country, a place
which was not America - we would be talking about ideas like
"autonomous regions".

Texas Autonomous Region?
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_autonomous_areas_by_country
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autonomous_administrative_division

There has to be something between full federalization - only 100
years old (1913) and civil war. There HAS TO BE.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #323 of 420: George Mokray (jonl) Thu 13 Jan 22 10:18

    
Via email from George Mokray:

bruces:  Kazakhstan's Chamber of Entrepreneurs

Sounds a lot like Jack London's Board of Industrial Magnates from
both The Iron Heel and, in passing, The Scarlet Plague where “the
census of 2010 gave eight billions for the whole world…” and “it was
in the summer of 2013 that the Plague came….  From the moment of the
first signs of it, a man would be dead in an hour.  Some lasted for
several hours.  Many died within ten or fifteen minutes or the
appearance of the first signs…”  All this In the midst of a
civilization, ruled by said Board of Industrial Magnates, in which
"down in our slums and labor-ghettos, we had bred a race of
barbarians, of savages;  and now, in the time of our calamity, they
turned upon us like the wild beasts they were and destroyed us.  And
they destroyed themselves as well…...."

fruitbatpangolin: some kind of explosion in personal fremen-tech

Screw the jetpack.  With wet bulb heat death and polar vortex
freezing death, I want my stilsuit STAT!

The Chinese crackdown on gaming and independent tutoring is probably
less about dumbing down and "idleness" than it is about fencing off
what is acceptable and what is not.  What will they use to replace
these activities and how are they expecting to shape the minds that
use those substitutes?  Perhaps they’ve actually learned from our
experiments in meritocracy, planning a “softer” cultural revolution,
or maybe it's just plastering over another oligarchy.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #324 of 420: Axon (axon) Thu 13 Jan 22 10:31

    
>jonl: Republicans are seizing the elections apparatus so that
they can direct the results of the election, and if they appear to
be deciding the elections regardless of the actual vote counts, I
expect an explosive reaction

I agree. I also think it highly likely that Dems will prevail by
such margins that the fixes the Pugs have put in place will be
insufficient to deny them. The Blutocrats will again stage a nutty,
but this time we'll be waiting for them. 

I read today that there may be a procedural circumnavigation of the
filibuster perplex to get voting protections passed with a simple
majority, or at least bring it to the floor and force the Pugs to
argue against it in CSPAN soundbites for the midterm campaign. I
remain confident that the Republic is secure and that the
Republicans are delaminating.

I still think crediting this "movement" with the status of
existential threat is a media confection we will all be studiously
ignoring that we once took seriously a few years hence. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #325 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Thu 13 Jan 22 14:54

    
I suspect we're equally afraid, Vinay. 

I've been astonished for decades at the lack of attention to the
radical right, whether out of ignorance (mainstream news media for
the longest time) or political cynicism (see the Bush II-era FBI
deeming "ecoterrorists" the greatest domestic terrorism threat in
the nation). 

I mean, what did it signify if a few women got screamed at outside
abortion clinics, or a few clinics got bombed, or an occasional
doctor assassinated? The Oklahoma City Federal Building bombing was
terrible – but that was just one guy, right? Ruby Ridge – well, that
guy was NUTS and a woman was the AG at the time amirite?

I don't claim to be special, I don't know why this stuff mattered to
me even though I lived in East Coast liberal bastions until I was
27, working at bookstores and Big Green groups. 

Then I moved to Oregon's liberal bastions for nine years. However,
one didn't need to travel too far out of the Portland or Eugene
metro core areas to start running into a lot of people who thought
Tim McVeigh was a hero, and think now that the Bundys are Paul
Reveres reborn. 

They're the mainstream in eastern Oregon, where most people want to
secede and become part of Idaho. I don't know where most of the
southern Oregonians want to secede to, being surrounded by crazy
California to the south and wacky central-western Oregon to the
north.  But there are comic book "militas" there waiting for the war
to start. They kinda hoped it would start when they started
"patrolling" little towns in summer 2020 against the approaching
Antifa hordes.

This type of faction, being naturally distrustful (although also
pro-conformity), was easier to ignore before the advent of the
popular Internet and addictive social media. Now they've been
mass-weaponized.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #326 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Thu 13 Jan 22 15:00

    
So, what makes you happy these days, Emily?

Well, hanging out with makers and hackers is usually pretty
uplifting. They're also distrustful, but also, often, kind weirdos
who eschew conformity. 

If those scenes are unfamiliar, check out https://www.rightscon.org/
or https://misinfocon.com/ or Make: magazine (full disclosure: I've
written books for Make).

I'm a co-founder and board member of Women Do News, a project to get
more bio pages of women journalists on Wikipedia. That's food for my
soul.

Sewing and knitting my own stuff instead of buying it is also a
solace.

I own a few crypto coins. It's an interesting sensation to have a
stake in whether Ethereum might actually break $100,000 by 2030. 
The blockchain is an entertaining topic over beers or dinner with
friends (if I ever get to do that again). I will risk differing with
the wise minds at Wired etc. to say it's pretty irrelevant to
billions of people, though. It's terrible for the climate and green
energy needs to go to a lot more prosaic things for the next few
decades, like homes and industry.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #327 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 13 Jan 22 15:09

    
Emily: Yeah, I think we have to get the cities out of the same
political units as the "flyover" states. Shift the people, shift the
map, or it's gonna be two dobermans fighting in the back of a car
over a steak. With kids in the car. It held for a while but the
cultural divergence is too great. Same thing in the UK: London is
*another dimension* compared to Yorkshire etc. We have to redraw the
map, for peace to be possible.

This is by no means *good* news but I don't know what the
alternative solution would be.

It's a bloody mess. Maybe it'll blow over. It could blow over. Worse
things have blown over. I'm not prophesying doom. But if stuff start
moving, extremely agile responses will be required. We need to
pre-game this stuff in progressive circles so we can be ready to
react by the time negotiations begin.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #328 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 13 Jan 22 15:21

    
Southern Oregonians secessionists want to be part of the new State
of Jefferson, along with the northernmost counties of California.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #329 of 420: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Thu 13 Jan 22 15:48

    

State of Jefferson has been around for a very long time, says this
Oregonian. 

today in divided, split Central Oregon where i live, i wore an N95 mask
outdoors in the middle school parking lot, to take a walk with my friend
before we picked up our kids. we usually do this unmasked, but she'd told
me that she was probably exposed to Covid a couple days ago.

a family of 6 or 7 people walked by, heading toward the school. i said,
"Howdy," as one does in a small town. they openly sneered at us and said
nothing back. in my not-so-very-punk-rock middle age, i had no blue mohawk
to sneer at, tattoos all covered up in the snowy weather. 

"did you see those people, looking at our masks like that?" asked my friend
as we walked off.

yes, yes i did. i saw them showing their children how to behave, too. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #330 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 13 Jan 22 16:11

    
I decided to be actually curious about Avalanche and went looking
for interesting things to read. Unfortunately, intelligent writing
on this subject is pretty thin on the ground.

The original 2018 paper is "Snowflake to Avalanche: A Novel
Metastable Consensus Protocol Family for Cryptocurrencies" and it's
pretty good. It was published anonymously on IPFS [1], but it seems
to have been by a team at Cornell? If you follow that link, it loads
so slowly that I thought it was broken. However, someone copied it
to Amazon [2], where it loads quickly. (That seems like a metaphor
for something?)

I've skimmed enough computer science research papers to say that
it's reasonably well-written and fits nicely into that genre. I
think I understand the algorithms, though not the proofs. Without a
deep understanding, we're not going to be able to tell if it's
subtly broken. I can only make shallow style nitpicks: they use they
mysterious abbreviation "whp" to mean "with high probability," I'm
guessing? Also, Figure 5 is missing.

I went looking at citations on Google Scholar and there are some,
but they're not that interesting. I did see one badly-written paper
that said it was all bullshit [3]. The original authors seem to have
responded that they misread the paper [4].

[1]
<https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmUy4jh5mGNZvLkjies1RWM4YuvJh5o2FYopNPVYwrRVGV>
[2]
<http://knowen-production.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/attachment/file/1922/Snowfla
ke%2Bto%2BAvalanche%2B-%2BA%2BNovel%2BMetastable%2BConsensus%2BProtocol%2BFami
ly.pdf>
[3]
<https://chan-relay.snowblossom.org/channel/85ywfwa2quwkcd3d765ljcg5f5exqg8t7fj
fzs9a/reviews/2019-11-11-On%20pseudo-profound%20bullshit%20in%20the%20Avalanch
e%20whitepaper.pdf>
[4] https://www.notion.so/d7akk10/2a05cdcfb5fc43969c675c5660d17851
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #331 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Thu 13 Jan 22 16:22

    
The algorithm is *really* simple. 20 minutes at a whiteboard, you
understand it: it's simulated annealing, but with the possibility of
adversarial actors. It's in a sweet spot for probability
calculations - any decent statistician can tell you exactly how
likely it is to fail under what conditions.

There's not much to go wrong with the algorithm. Compare this to
ETH2 and all the associated complexity. None of which is to say it's
going to work flawlessly - there is an implementation, and the field
is still young.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #332 of 420: Axon (axon) Thu 13 Jan 22 17:05

    
>emilyg: They're the mainstream in eastern Oregon, where most people
want to
secede and become part of Idaho.

True, but they are so sparse that they constitute but one of
Oregon's seven (thanx California!) legislative districts. Land
doesn't vote, and dirt doesn't march. 

That these people exist is not news. Their grievance is that they
are politically irrelevant, and they're right; they are. That their
relative population is minuscule still has the capacity to surprise,
however. I expect they will learn to live with disappointment.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #333 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 13 Jan 22 17:07

    
One thing I worry about it whether their assumption of random
sampling of the network will hold, or whether it can be subverted.
The original paper is too high-level to tell. It's the sort of thing
that might work in theory but not in practice, particularly when
someone *wants* to break it.

On a related note, what exactly happens when there is a network
partition? They talk about it a little, but I don't get it. It's the
sort of thing that Aphyr would test.

I also looked at the source code [1]. It's written in Go which I
know how to read, and it looks well-organized and would probably be
a reasonable codebase to work on. But my skim isn't going to tell us
whether there are security holes either. I was curious about
bootstrapping and found the spot where it seems to choose randomly
from a hard-coded list of IP's [2]. Someone doing a deeper dive than
me might figure out where those IP's come from.

I found a postmortem of a concurrency bug in early 2021 that caused
a partial outage [3]. It seems like a reasonable sort of bug that
might happen to anyone. Are there more bugs? Who knows.

Beyond that, there are engineering updates that I don't understand
and don't seem to be about fundamental issues, and a whole lot of
hype. The CEO is Emin Gün Sirer who worked at Bell Labs, Digital
Equipment, and NEC, and then became a professor at Cornell. Sounds
great, but his Twitter account (named "el33th4xor" with a cartoon
avatar [4]) is now devoted to retweeting Avalanche hype. There is
also a more serious blog [5] that he doesn't write. I think maybe
it's for his graduate students?

So, that's as far as I got as far as finding intelligent writing. I
think the thing I'm missing is something a good science writer would
do, which is call up a bunch of other scientists and ask them if a
new paper is any good and how it fits in with the literature. Or
maybe there is someone in the Avalanche community who writes as well
as Vitalik Buterin, but I haven't found them. Or is there some
mailing list where the real cryptographers hang out?

So I still don't know how anyone would decide if it will really work
or if it will eventually collapse due to some undiscovered weakness.
If they had a red team trying to attack it, that might result in
more confidence? I guess we'll find out when attackers start getting
serious about trying to break it.

[1] https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego
[2]
https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/master/genesis/beacons.go
[3]
https://medium.com/avalancheavax/preliminary-analysis-of-the-invalid-minting-b
ug-bee940cbd9e9
[4] https://twitter.com/el33th4xor
[5] https://hackingdistributed.com/
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #334 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Thu 13 Jan 22 19:32

    
Heya axon. How can we reform “two senators for every state”? Serious
question. Until population size dictates representation across the
board, it does seem like dirt’s going to continue having an outsized
vote. 

Meanwhile, whites are still the majority in the US for a few more
decades at least, and a really unfortunately large number of us are
freaked out that the sunset of the white majority is in sight. These
folks might have remained a backwater, mostly not voicing their
white resentments, if not for being stoked by FOX and Rush for
several decades, overlapping with the past two decades of the most
influential tech companies being run by dude bro libertarians.

As an environmental reporter, I tell myself that there are much
bigger and more ancient realities that put the human scale of time
in a helpfully reduced perspective. 

Although when one has to start contemplating history on an
evolutionary or galactic scale to cope with the current state of
things…

Ok, here’s a hopeful development: A German court gave Anwar Raslan
life in prison for his crimes against humanity. “The landmark trial
marked the first time a high-ranking former Syrian official has
faced Syrians in open court in a war crimes case,” as NPR put it
earlier today.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #335 of 420: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Thu 13 Jan 22 20:34

    


>  That these people exist is not news.

being dismissive of them has not been helpful, historically. think back to
the horror that dawned upon you in November, 2016. 

the attitude i'm hearing is "they're just a handful of hicks on too much
dirt, who cares." 

we should all fucking care -- both as humans, who care about our fellow
humans, and as politically concerned folks who don't want to be destroyed
by Trumpism, civil war, etc.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #336 of 420: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Thu 13 Jan 22 21:44

    
>> Although when one has to start contemplating history on an
evolutionary or galactic scale to cope with the current state of
things…

Boy is that the truth.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #337 of 420: Axon (axon) Thu 13 Jan 22 21:45

    
>emilyg: How can we reform “two senators for every state”? Serious
question. 

Serious answer: Statehood for DC and Puerto Rico, to start. Guam,
too. Wtf does a constitutional republic need with territorial
"possessions"? Either give them statehood or independence.
Colonialism is soooo 18th century... 

Frivolous answer: Repeal Reconstruction. Revoke statehood for
coloring outside the constitutional lines. 

>magalen: the attitude i'm hearing is "they're just a handful of
hicks on too much
dirt, who cares." 

It's not that I don't care. It's that I don't think they pose a
meaningful risk. I think they're likely to be troublesome, but not
an existential threat to our republic.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #338 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 13 Jan 22 22:12

    
The question of whether Oregon is likely to remain a blue state
seems mostly distinct from which party will control the US Senate.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #339 of 420: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Thu 13 Jan 22 22:43

    
You can't get statehood through the Senate. What next?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #340 of 420: I was oilers1972, now going by (mct67) Thu 13 Jan 22 23:09

    
In agreement with #335.

"I think they're likely to be troublesome, but not an existential
threat to our republic."

Perhaps, but troublesome is bad and scary enough.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #341 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Fri 14 Jan 22 02:47

    
The hard question is how much staying power does it have.

The militia movement... I remember hearing about that *way* back in
the day, in the 1990s probably around Ruby Ridge. The folks who were
young militiamen then are fifty and sixty now. We're dealing with
their kids, and for the older guys, their grandkids.

I'm not enough of a historian of these matters to know if the
militiamen are drawing on the KKK heritage - is it the grandkids of
the guys wearing white hoods in the 1950s? I don't know if the KKK
grew straight out of the Confederacy, kinda like American Legion for
Confederates. I lived in the States for quite a while, but I've been
back in London for more than a decade. It's all kinda distant. 

Anyway I don't think it's going away anytime soon. Whether it
*matters* is an open question: the Civil Rights movement backs right
up on to Abolitionism and comes right into the present as Black
Lives Matter, but if they aren't rioting, for the most part the
mainstream of politics totally ignores their concerns. Which shows
that however many people support the cause, however right the cause
is, most of the time it will be ignored. Is it possible the
Trumpists / red hats / modern confederacy / y'all queda / vanilla
ISIS / militia types can be similarly ignored in future? The Civil
Rights movement has to fight for every inch of ground and is very
heavily opposed and policed: could the same fate await the Red Hats?

It's entirely possible. It could all just blow away in the wind.

Or not. It could stick very very hard and become a dominant
political force.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #342 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Fri 14 Jan 22 04:38

    
New topic: META? Metaverse? 

I got a Oculus Quest 2 a few months ago. Used it compulsively for
two weeks, then it sat gathering dust. 

I think the hardware is there but the software is still barbaric.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #343 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 14 Jan 22 05:04

    
*Anxious chatter about a future American Civil War must be of a lot
of interest to historians of the Chinese Civil War.  They had to
choke it back a little so that they could endure World War II, but
then they just went right back at it.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_Civil_War

*You have to wonder if the hegemonic Chinese would bother to pick a
side between "Red America" and "Blue America," or just suavely agree
that there's only one America, and then arm both of them.

*Everybody decries Xinjiang till they've got some rambunctious rural
region full of rebellious ethnics; then, hey man, that
face-recognition and all those tracker phone apps can be pretty
handy.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #344 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 14 Jan 22 05:07

    
*Maybe some future Richard Nixon will fly to China in a "can't beat
'em, join 'em" arrangement, and the world will tremble all over.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #345 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 14 Jan 22 05:41

    

"It’s not ‘Metaverse’ unless it’s made in an office park next to a
freeway in Menlo Park. Otherwise it’s just sparkling VR."

"Man is born free and everywhere he is into blockchains."

"Apparently ‘using a screen in a car’ is now ‘the car Metaverse’. I
tweeted this in a coffee shop, so I think that means I am
participating in ‘the coffee Metaverse.'


*Benedict Evans @benedictevans has been having a pretty good
pandemic.  As his former employers at the a16Z venture capital
outfit get more and more cranky, magisterial and self-important, he
becomes funnier.  He seems almost light-hearted as things get worse,
like "Chaos Under Heaven, the situation is excellent!"
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #346 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 14 Jan 22 05:42

    
In chatting with my Italian art-world colleagues here in Turin, they
seem less concerned about NFTs than they were just a few months ago.
There was so much loose funny-money there that it could have wreaked
savage havoc throughout the European art world, but NFT people are
indifferent to "trad art."  They want to fling their money at the 
prospects that excite and motivate them: exclusive tokens,
ape-shaped membership coupons, collectible toys, running shoes,
play-for-pay social games and metaverses that offer real-estate
purchases.

*There's a slice of Venn Diagram overlap, where Sotheby's lives,
where fine art does overlap with very expensive NFTs, but the NFT
world doesn't care to invade the art institutions.  It  seems to
wants to haul itself to Mars on Elon's coat-tails. It finds
art-world credibility to be not worth having -- it's too highbrow
and toney, it gets in their way.

They've got zero interest in cultural heritage, and they're obsessed
with moonshot schemes.  That could change, and it commonly does, but
they'll probably have to get old and gray first.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #347 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Fri 14 Jan 22 06:23

    
"Man is born free and everywhere he is into blockchains." - this is
a wickedness :)
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #348 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 14 Jan 22 06:24

    
Some Buddhists deal with the current state of the world by
practicing Tonglen... "In tonglen practice, we visualize taking in
the pain of others with every in-breath and sending out whatever
will benefit them on the out-breath. In the process, we become
liberated from age- old patterns of selfishness. We begin to feel
love for both ourselves and others; we begin to take care of
ourselves and others."
<https://www.lionsroar.com/how-to-practice-tonglen/> Maybe this is
what we should all be doing.

It's hard to know what's happening. Everything we think we know is
filtered through unreliable perception, and too much of the world's
information is filtered through unreliable media, and even more
unreliable social media, for most of us. We talk about militias and
civil war, but I have no intelligence about the competence and
potential power of militias in the USA. It's possible that they're
powerful enough to wreak havoc, it's also possible that they'd be
taken down in a couple of hours by government forces, even though
some of the government forces are sympathetic enough to pull their
punches. A lot of these militia folks are well-educated middle-class
Americans who should know better. Stewart Rhodes, founder and leader
of the Oath Keepers, is a lawyer and an army vet from Montana. What
got into his head? 

"Tonglen can be done for those who are ill, those who are dying or
have died, or those who are in pain of any kind." Sounds to me like
Stewart Rhodes and his compatriots are in real pain. What happens if
we direct our Tonglen practice at those guys? "Usually, we look away
when we see someone suffering. Their pain brings up our fear or
anger; it brings up our resistance and confusion. So we can also do
tonglen for all the people just like ourselves—all those who wish to
be compassionate but instead are afraid, who wish to be brave but
instead are cowardly."

We are where we are precisely because forces who consider themselves
above it all are stoking hate and division. They seem to know how to
leverage the chaos for their won benefit. Hate is a tool, hate is a
weapon. Sowing division, they reap power. The Civil War is already a
thing, and it works for them quite nicely. The Civil War is not a
war, it's a strategy.

I had the Incredible String Band in my head this week... "I know you
belong to everybody but you can't deny that I'm you... You give all
your brightness away and it only makes you brighter." That's a
world, too... there's more than one world, a world where climate is
collapsing, a world where hate is proliferating - those aren't the
only worlds, and they're certainly not the only possible worlds. Can
we end the fight by joining the fight? Or do we end it by refusing
to fight?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #349 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Fri 14 Jan 22 07:01

    
Bruce: "the NFT world doesn't care to invade the art institutions"

We learned from the experience of banking. The big banks *all* did
blockchain prototypes around 2016. It was a huge push and the
blockchain world expected to get fully integrated. 

https://www.santander.com/en/press-room/press-releases/santander-launches-the-
first-end-to-end-blockchain-bond not much more came of it than this.

So we know the "real art world" aren't coming along for the ride,
except in an kind of weird, episodic way (Beeple). I think our role
is to build a real commercial market for folk art and pop culture
rather than trying to storm the world of modern art. The Nerds
already won cinema (well, "films") with Marvel and Disney, and one
may imagine the same thing is going to happen to "art."
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #350 of 420: Gary Gach (ggg) Fri 14 Jan 22 09:05

    
Joining the fight … or refusing to fight ? Or … not taking sides…!? 
If human beings are our enemy then with whom are we to live?


Tonglen & metta = mighty good medicine to clarify the above.  they
help establish & maintain grounding in Reality, stability &
resilience in necessary compassion … … &, in & of themselves, are
not enough.  IE, quietism.  To be true, they must be engaged thru
action.

——-=//=——-

Am still interested in hearing any wisdom about where mainland might
go with Taiwan … the US policy towards both being intentional
ambiguity … a consulate for the people’s republic, and golf with
wonks from the free republic.

=====—-/—-=====

Has Heather Cox Richardson answered any viewers’ question ( she
devotes whole programs to Q&A) about the history of the militia
movement ?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #351 of 420: Axon (axon) Fri 14 Jan 22 10:03

    
>jnfr: You can't get statehood through the Senate. 

Not in the 117th, perhaps. We get a whole new Senate in less than a
year.

>jnfr:What next?

There are 20 GOP Senate seats in the hazard this cycle, five
undefended by incumbents. Dems should take half of them. One
solution to the filibuster perplex is to hold 60 seats.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #352 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 14 Jan 22 10:06

    
<ggg>: Heather Cox Richardson just published good/scary info about
the Oath Keepers...

"The Justice Department indicted Oath Keepers leader [Elmer] Stewart
Rhodes III and 10 other members of the Oath Keepers, a far-right
antigovernment militia that specializes in recruiting veterans, for
a number of crimes including seditious conspiracy in relation to the
January 6 insurrection. Sedition is the crime of inciting a revolt
against the government, and these men allegedly established training
sessions and areas for staging equipment around Washington, D.C.,
before the insurrection to support an attack on that day. They also
brought knives, tactical vests, radio equipment, and so on, to the
Capitol on January 6.

"Rhodes stated that, should Biden assume the office of the
presidency, 'We will have to do a bloody, massively bloody
revolution against them. That’s what’s going to have to happen.' He
wanted Trump to use military force to stop the transfer of
presidential power. On Christmas Day, he messaged his
co-conspirators about the January 6 joint session of Congress, 'We
need to make those senators very uncomfortable with all of us being
a few hundred feet away.... I think Congress will screw him [Trump]
over. The only chance we/he has is if we scare the shit out of them
and convince them it will be torches and pitchforks time is [sic]
they don’t do the right thing. But I don’t think they will listen.'
On December 31, he wrote: 'There is no standard political or legal
way out of this.'"
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #353 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Fri 14 Jan 22 11:20

    
The metaverse will allow Meta to see and record your every blink,
eye movement, breath, and utterance. Santa Claus on steroids.

<https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/01/13/privacy-vr-metaverse/>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #354 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Fri 14 Jan 22 12:50

    
This is why the blockchain people are so up in arms about stuff like
Meta and fighting like hell for Decentraland: it is possible, at
least in theory, to build the Metaverse as a peer to peer protocol
where shared state is managed by the peers (on the blockchain)
rather than having all the shared state being managed on corporate
servers which also drag in all your telemetry and feed it to
advertisers.

That vision is roughly the same vision as RSS vs. Facebook. It's the
eternal fight between "you do most of the work and get most of the
control" and "you do none of the work, are are sold like potatoes."

As we know that fight very strongly tends to wind up with people
being sold like potatoes. But hope springs eternal and _maybe this
time it's different_.

Here's why. It's possible that The Metaverse (tm) winds up with a
*utility* backbone - something as general-case as Ethereum or
Bitcoin. That general case backbone is neutral: akin to ISPs obeying
Net Neutrality as a principle. Big Dumb Blockchain.

On top of Big Dumb Blockchain, a "Metaverse Protocol" which is
basically HTML-meets-VR. You have a space, it speaks the Metaverse
Protocol over the Big Dumb Blockchain, and the *value* in the
ecosystem is created by an enormous myriad of little companies and
hobbyists pumping out great little experiences. They get directly
paid (by the minute?) via the Big Dumb Blockchain and are therefore
not beholden to the App Store / Meta / Apple / Whoever.

It's just about technically feasible. 

https://grayscale.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/grayscale-building-blocks-dec
entraland-march-2021.pdf 

Look, there's running code!
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rL09UfXvl6g

If we could stop snarking about people making a lot of money from
speculating on cartoon apes... maybe we could actually free the
Metaverse. You know? Ready Player One?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #355 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Fri 14 Jan 22 13:58

    
We may be making a category mistake if we assume that "blockchain
people" are likely to be immune from the moral temptations that will
lead to what <karish> mentions in <353>.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #356 of 420: I was oilers1972, now going by (mct67) Fri 14 Jan 22 14:06

    
"We are where we are precisely because forces who consider
themselves above it all are stoking hate and division. They seem to
know how to leverage the chaos for their won benefit. Hate is a
tool, hate is a weapon. Sowing division, they reap power."

And most of all, sowing (or surfing on) fear, which I believe
disguises itself as hate.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #357 of 420: I was oilers1972, now going by (mct67) Fri 14 Jan 22 14:09

    
"I'm not enough of a historian of these matters to know if the
militiamen are drawing on the KKK heritage - is it the grandkids of
the guys wearing white hoods in the 1950s?"

Not all militias.  Some are explicitly white supremacists, some are
just anti-government, some are nationalists, etc.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #358 of 420: I was oilers1972, now going by (mct67) Fri 14 Jan 22 14:26

    
"A lot of these militia folks are well-educated middle-class
Americans who should know better. Stewart Rhodes, founder and leader
of the Oath Keepers, is a lawyer and an army vet from Montana. What
got into his head?"

Just because one is educated doesn't necessarily mean one is
compassionate (or at least tolerant) toward others.  Education is a
tool, like just about anything else, and it can be directed toward
life-affirming or more venal or atavistic ends.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #359 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Fri 14 Jan 22 14:37

    
Craig Maudlin: There's a reason RSS readers didn't carry
advertising.

Your code, your computer, your P2P network... it's just not going to
broadcast the telemetry, any more than EMACS uploads what you type
for spell checking.

A FOSS Multiverse on blockchain *is* possible.

I doubt it'll happen but that's not for technical reasons. It's for
reasons of WILL.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #360 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Fri 14 Jan 22 14:49

    
“If human beings are our enemy then with whom are we to live?”

The answer that initially pops to mind: “What if it’s not that
simple?”

I’m not a Sinophile, but I used my quick-study skills to credibly
edit a few articles about politics or religion under Xi last year.
So for whatever it’s worth: If I were Taiwan, I’d look at what’s
happened in Hong Kong, Xinjiang and the South China Sea over the
past few years, and worry.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #361 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Fri 14 Jan 22 15:46

    
Re: <359>

One important sort of category mistake might occur when we ascribe to a
technology certain characteristics that are really just the result of
human choices. If you haven't seen ads delivered via RSS, you've been
lucky -- or you stopped using RSS before the ads started to appear.
It also took quite a while before ads began to be delivered via email,
as I recall. But, as with email, there's nothing about RSS tech that
*prevents* ads.

> Your code, your computer, your P2P network... it's just not going to
> broadcast the telemetry, ...

I think there was a time we might have said something similar about
"Your TV" -- but now we know that TVs can and do collect and broadcast
quite a bit of telemetry. 

> A FOSS Multiverse on blockchain *is* possible.

I completely agree  -- and, as you say, it's even been done.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #362 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 14 Jan 22 15:52

    
Vinay, I’m wondering which “blockchain people” you enjoy reading,
and where do conversations take place? Is via Twitter or do they
usually happen elsewhere?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #363 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Fri 14 Jan 22 17:03

    
So it used to be Twitter and Medium, but I don't know where it is
now. Pandemic took me out of the conference circuit, so I don't get
the face-to-face pointers these days. Back soon I hope!

Andreas Antonopoulos is great. Emin Gun Sirer is great. Vitalik is
great. Joe Lubin is great (he's the spitting image of Lex Luthor, if
you're wondering, but is a lovely man as far as I know). Ian Grigg,
obviously - inventor of the Ricardian Contract. Stephen Diehl if you
want a critic (an old friend). Nick Szabo, although covid seems to
have tilted him at an odd angle. Older material like The Playdoh
Protocols. Satoshi. Stani from AAVE. Stan Stalnaker of Hub
Culture/Ven.

I feel like this is basically a Classics syllabus given how fast the
field is moving.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #364 of 420: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Fri 14 Jan 22 18:44

    
I will definitely be fighting for Senate seats this year.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #365 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 14 Jan 22 20:51

    
“Ricardian contract” is new to me. A search brings up several web
pages defining it, which I only sort of get. Do they actually exist,
or is it just a theoretical construct? If they’re real, it might be
interesting to see an example of one in use.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #366 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 15 Jan 22 02:14

    
Brian:

Here is an NFT on OpenSea which gives the owner the right to
physically take delivery of a 1oz gold bar currently vaulted in
Singapore, or its financial value.

https://opensea.io/assets/0x495f947276749ce646f68ac8c248420045cb7b5e/478243877
05324153400210554042155132922682187088261737780213014306821163188225

When this NFT is purchased, each new buyer pays 2% of the value of
the NFT for a set of six Ricardian contracts, each signed by a
real-world legal entity with a bank account, corporate registration
documents etc. Actual companies, including my own, which
orchestrates the legal-technical interface work.

The payments happen on chain, and the proof of payment (a digital
signature on the blockchain, authorizing the payment) constitutes
acceptance of the contract: a service is offered, accepted, and paid
for in a single transaction.

You can see this suite of contracts here:
https://passport.mattereum.com/ntfa.20210319.20.alpha.004.619263/

Each warranty offer protects the Real World Asset gold bullion NFT
buyer against a different class of risks. Together they form a sort
of "legal testudo" - providing a relatively secure armoured shell to
protect the assertion that the NFT buyer **actually gets the gold**
or equivalent financial value in a very broad range of
contingencies. Over time, obviously we'll add more and more
protection in layers to get closer to 100% protection over time.

Here is the full legal text of one of the Ricardian contracts:
https://passport.mattereum.com/ntfa.20210319.20.alpha.004.619263/06_carbon/ass
ets/out/certification-contract.html

This one is a contract between the NFT owner and my company, which
guarantees that we have bought-and-retired carbon credits to cover
the physical mining of the gold bullion that is being sold. It also
covers the CO2 emissions of the NFT issuing process.

Clause 20 has the arbitration machinery.

We've worked fairly closely with the UK government on arbitration
rules for blockchain asset disputes.

https://www.pinsentmasons.com/out-law/news/new-dispute-rules-envisage-direct-t
o-blockchain-enforcement-arbitral-decisions

The rules themselves are here:
https://35z8e83m1ih83drye280o9d1-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/20
21/04/Lawtech_DDRR_Final.pdf

We get a name check on page 4.

So what's being built out here is a very tightly bound legal
framework for buying and selling physical goods, with suites of
Ricardian contracts creating legally-enforceable claims about what
the goods are **DRAWN ON THIRD PARTIES**. Those third parties do not
benefit from the sale of the goods themselves, they make a living
providing legal warranties on the goods - they're essentially third
party inspectors with no economic interest in the situation other
than by selling insurance on the fact that something (for example)
contains no slave labour.

We work with a world class anti-slavery expert on a long term
project to drive slavery out of the supply chain using exactly these
kinds of certification protocols. I would estimate it will be two
years before we are doing this at an industrial scale - it is very
complicated - but the will is overwhelming and the technical, legal
and slavery-prevention expertise is sufficient. We are going to do
this, do it right, and do it at scale. It took us a couple of years
to get CO2 done, and now all the NFTs we produce attached are fully
offset. 

We also took the entire Avalanche blockchain Net Zero CO2 last year.

https://podcast.mattereum.com/episodes/ending-slavery-with-technology-social-m
ovements-with-helen-burrows/transcript

You can read more about our anti-slavery work here.
https://passport.mattereum.com/ntfa.20210319.20.alpha.004.619263/

The objective is to produce a trade commons: a circular economy ("on
the blockchain") in which all goods are fully CO2 offset, slavery
free, and nearly everything has been used before and is being passed
around and used, repaired and re-repaired, until it is genuinely
done.

We think that will produce both higher quality of life, and
*dramatically* reduced environmental impact from that quality of
life.

I've put this stuff here in quite some detail to really illustrate
the point: Ricardian contracts are extremely powerful tools for
creating the world you want if they are applied diligently and
intelligently to real-world problems. It is an act of will: you have
to *push* in that direction to get the blockchain to behave this
way.

Otherwise, if you don't, it's a lazy beast that follows the path of
least resistance, and you get very expensive
cartoon-monkey-wearing-a-hat jpegs.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #367 of 420: George Mokray (jonl) Sat 15 Jan 22 07:11

    
Via email from George Mokray:

(bslesins) #318 "There seems to be precedent for American acceptance
and tolerance of higher levels of violence without society breaking
down?"

A thousand deaths and more a day from COVID in USAmerica is now
taken in stride, barely mentioned on the news.  Welcome to the
behavioral sink.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #368 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sat 15 Jan 22 08:26

    
Also, George, I think whether or not society is stable can be both
subjective and situational experiences. Whether we’re at peace is
all relative to how far you live from the front, you know?

When you start to delve into the data on structural inequities in
the U.S. – I’ve been editing stories explaining the chronic health
disparities between whites and most minorities, for example – it is
obvious that society has yet to function consistently well for
millions of people. 

In terms of perception, Rush Limbaugh rose on his talent for
twisting a small bit of progress on LGBTQ+ or women’s rights, for
example, into a towering sign that society was breaking down right
around straight white males. 

Then, with globalization, it’s arguable that society really did
start breaking down around millions of white working class people,
as manufacturing fled to cheap labor and laissez-faire regulation
overseas. The powers that be had deemed them and their families
extraneous to the economy and society, and they knew it.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #369 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 15 Jan 22 08:38

    
Emily: Yeah. Skin tone vs. life expectancy is one of those charts
which **should** exist, but nobody with the data will present it.

Literally just pantone colors down one side, and life-years down the
other, for the entire global population.

I really appreciate the focus you are bringing to this reality.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #370 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 15 Jan 22 09:36

    
<366> thanks for the detailed explanation! It might be good to put
something like that on your website as an introduction for those of
us catching up.

<367> The bit about "barely mentioned in the news" irks me. I find
it odd to pretend that the top news story of the past two years,
often with its own dedicated newspaper section and daily updated
statistics page where you can look at the death rate at any time,
broken down to state and county levels, is somehow undercovered.
There are good and bad news stories but overall, journalists have
done a great job on this one and as a news junkie I could hardly ask
for more.

I wish I could find better charts and analysis for other news
stories I'm interested in.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #371 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 15 Jan 22 09:59

    
I agree with <bslesins> - most of the coverage of Covid has been
excellent and informative, though confusing. The confusion is not
attributable to the news organizations, but to the actual work of
science in action - we've watched how a novel phenomenon is studied
and how thinking changes as research continues and new facts emerge.
Because news is so immediate, we've seen the evolution of scientific
thinking as it happens. Anyone seeking authoritative and unchanging
explanations have been, not just disappointed, but in many cases
confused and pissed off. Science is a disciplined approach to
knowledge, but it is not a source of ultimate truth. Rather, it's a
method of inquiry and evolved understanding through ongoing
research. Speaking for myself, from following Covid so closely for
the last couple of years, I've learned not just a lot about the
specific disease, but a lot about epidemiology, public health
practices, how diseases evolve and how they spread. I'm thankful for
the coverage, and uncertain how to address the unfortunate problem
of pervasive misunderstanding, especially as it's aggressively
politicized.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #372 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 15 Jan 22 10:12

    
<hexayurt>: "nobody with the data will present it" is false. Those
graphs are readily available. The Census Bureau publishes all the
numbers, current and historical, for every community in the US. It's
easy to search for that information.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #373 of 420: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Sat 15 Jan 22 10:13

    
The point that seems to be lost in this conversation is that the 
confusion is a direct result of deliberate campaign of misinformation by 
the administration.  Trump knew it was going to be bad, but made a 
calculation that the proven steps to prevent pandemic infection would be 
far too costly, would hurt the economy, and at that point in time, the DOW 
was his big selling poing for re-election.  And he decided to kill people 
in order to get re-elected.

Once he compromised the CDC, and sabotaged Fauci, there has been no place 
to get clear, clean, and trustworthy information.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #374 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 15 Jan 22 10:20

    
<rik> That's what I meant when I said "especially as it's
aggressively
politicized." But you're correct in that, more than exploiting
misunderstanding, Trumpists were adding to and encouraging it...
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #375 of 420: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Sat 15 Jan 22 10:33

    
Yes, but "adding to it and encouraging it" misses the point that 
he began it.   This is the big story.  Trump knew what he was doing and 
literally chose to kill people in pursuit of power.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #376 of 420: David Gans (tnf) Sat 15 Jan 22 11:15

    
<373> thank you, Rik. Science is facing a stiff headwind of deliberate
falsehood.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #377 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 15 Jan 22 11:19

    
*Meanwhile, in Kazakhstan, it looks like the foreign troops called
in by the new regime are declaring victory and promptly leaving.

*There were only about 2,000 of them, and Kazakhstan is as big as
Western Europe all by itself, so it's not like they were gonna be
able to loot the place.

*I'm gonna chalk this one up as a victory for Russian diplomacy.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #378 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 15 Jan 22 12:00

    
Virtual Sea Monkey: the census collects "race" data. They don't
collect skin colour data.

There's a difference.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #379 of 420: Scott M. Ashkenaz (smash) Sat 15 Jan 22 12:43

    
Not really touched on in this iteration of SotW:  Belarus (tried
and) said out loud what Russia has been silent about for years now,
using refugees as a strategic weapon to polarize and destabilize the
west. Subtle or overt nudges to create floods of untethered people
to stress social services and political tolerance.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #380 of 420: Paul Belserene (paulbel) Sat 15 Jan 22 12:49

    
It doesn't seem to have worked quite as well as Lukashenko imagined
it would.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #381 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 15 Jan 22 13:18

    
Time traveling back to Vinay's earlier <366>:

> It is an act of will: you have
> to *push* in that direction to get the blockchain to behave this
> way.
>
> Otherwise, if you don't, it's a lazy beast that follows the path of
> least resistance, and you get very expensive
> cartoon-monkey-wearing-a-hat jpegs.

Yay! I'm ready to stand-up and cheer for this.

I'm a technologist, but the future isn't really about technology (what
we used to refer to as 'high-tech'), imo, it's really the choices that
we *humans* make that will (and always have) shape the future.

Of course we know there's an intimate relationship between humans and
technology, in the larger sense of 'technology' -- the art, craft, skill
(the techniques) of being human. Language itself is vital tech.

A big problem I think we have (in a State of the World sense) is that
we have allowed the meaning of the very words we use for thinking and
speaking to be corrupted (ever so slowly). But now we have a meaning
crisis.

And binary thinking ends up fracturing meaning along partisan lines.
So we end up with large groups of people who equate "blockchain" with
"Bitcoin" and then reflexively with all the really bad qualities: "hype"
"scam," "fraud," "wasted energy," "climate-change," and the coming
heat-death of the universe.

On the other (binary) hand are those who equate "blockchain" with a
sort of "Utopian Internet" (that rhymes with "A Declaration of the
Independence of Cyberspace"). This too is big problem.

We need to find a way to avoid excluding the middle: the possibility
that, in the end, "blockchain" will just turn out to be a useful label
for a basket of human-centered techniques for reaching pragmatic
consensus about our desired future State of the World.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #382 of 420: Administrivia (jonl) Sat 15 Jan 22 15:08

    
Just a reminder that this conversation's hosted by the WELL. If
you're interested in ongoing participation in conversations like
this on many many subjects, consider joining the WELL:
<https://www.well.com/join/> 

If you're reading this, you're probably already familiar with the
url format:
<https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/516/State-of-the-World-2022-pa
ge01.html> 

From page 2
(<https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/516/State-of-the-World-2022-pa
ge02.html>) onward, there are navigational elements at the top of the page.

If you're not a member of the WELL but would like to add a comment
or ask a question, just send it via email to inkwell at well.com.
We'll post it.

The principals of the conversation (this year Bruce Sterling, Jon
Lebkowsky, and guests Vinay Gupta and Emily Gertz) made a commitment
to post for two weeks, January 4-17. So Tuesday the 17th is our last
day, though people might hang out and keep posting past that date.

We've been doing this every year for the last couple of decades, and
this is by far the most active and enlighting conversation in the
series. Assuming no apocalypse, we'll be back again next year... 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #383 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sat 15 Jan 22 16:17

    
am wondering if <jonl> perceives this to be a better convo because
the chiliastic 'in the future we will all have our own private
gyrocopter' thinking --- just hasnt been present. always a
distortion factor...
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #384 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sat 15 Jan 22 20:44

    
Craig Maudlin: liking than you're liking it.

Tech will only save us if we make it.

On the language side, I think Hakim Bey's ontological anarchism was
a sort of bridging moment where a particular thread of corrupted
existentialism leapt into the anarchist and subcultural world, and
it's spread from there. Bey has become (with good reason) persona
non grata pretty much everywhere but it's too late: ontological
anarchism took hold.

In the minds of strong, good people the concepts opened up space.
But in the hands of people less able to deal with the wide open
quality we got flat earth cults. I'm not saying "no Hakim Bey, no
flat earthers."

But he documented ways to eat reason when it was used as an
instrument of oppression, when we were being minemaxed into
submission. It's just a shame that he was a monster cutting his own
chains, dressed as a freedom fighter cutting ours.

hakim bey -> psychogeographers -> weird subcultures -> ironic flat
earthers -> post-ironic flat earthers -> actual flat earthers ->
flat earth is actually operated by aliens to keep us in the Matrix
flat earthers -> crypto flat earthers -> earth is actually a torus
flat earthers.
https://www.ladbible.com/news/news-flat-earthers-have-a-new-theory-introducing
-doughnut-earth-20181106
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #385 of 420: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sun 16 Jan 22 06:18

    
Anyone else a fan of “On the Media”? This week’s show is all about
the wave of media attention on whether the U.S. is headed for a
second civil war – why journalists and commentators are circling
around the idea, what “civil war” really looks like in 21st century
America.

https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/otm/segments/talk-possible-new-civil-war-
useful-on-the-media

Sample quote from host Brooke Gladstone: “Most of the speculative
stuff is a lot of hogwash.”

Guest David Remnick (editor of The New Yorker) on the potential that
Trump, a former president who’s openly embraced the “most violent
and or deluded political actors in the country,” will run for
president again: 

“Is that Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson? No. Is it potentially
disastrous for for the future of democracy and this country? You’re
damn right it is. If the metaphor, if that’s what it is, of ‘civil
war’ makes us pay attention, then that is legitimate, because the
facts bear it out.”

Transcription errors mine!
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #386 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 16 Jan 22 07:03

    
Emily Gertz:

So much of the problem is critical infrastructure. 20 years ago,
critical infrastructure was as fragile as an egg shell. Tough
against little bumps and bounces, but when it broke, it *broke*.

It's hard to say whether the post 9/11 infrastructure spend has
really helped. But the nightmare scenario is pretty simple: a few
tens of thousands of nutcases, spread out across America and loosely
networked, take their hunting rifles and shoot up the electrical
grid. Maybe they set fire to some natural gas stuff too for good
measure. Backhoeing fibre optic cables is left as an exercise for
the advanced students.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D.C._sniper_attacks

https://www.reuters.com/article/us-california-internet-attack-idUSKCN0PA32A201
50630

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2021_Texas_power_crisis - this, but
with people taking chainsaws to power poles.

Now none of this wins wars. It doesn't even start wars. It's just a
gigantic amount of inconvenience and, in a very cold winter,
possibly death. The economic costs are unimaginable. Entire states
without power for days or weeks, and then just after it's all turned
back on, it goes down again. The perps are super hard to catch
because they're not standing around to get caught: take a couple of
shots, go dormant for six weeks, then pop out and do it again.
Decentralized sabotage campaigns.

It's the resulting state of emergency that creates the political
backlash.

This kind of scenario has been talked about for probably 30 or 40
years as a threat that might come up in a hot war scenario: "the
Russians" and their special forces types dropped in to blow up dams
etc. was a staple for years.

Fear about a grass roots domestic terror threat of this general
model has probably been a thing since the OK City bombing in the
1990s.

As with the covid pandemic, it's not that people don't understand
and study the risk. It's that we don't know to what degree the
measures have been put in place to handle it.

And that's what really worries me. There seems to be no end of these
risks that experts see and try and get action on, and nothing
happens, and then the risk happens, and the folks with power turn
around and say "who knew?"

I don't currently see an ideology which would view smashing the
American power grid through a campaign of decentralized, leaderless
sabotage as a worthwhile goal. So maybe it's just the punch nobody
will throw. But with the right kind of nihilism anything is
possible.

I am glad not to worry about things like this for a living any more.
Those were dark, dark years.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #387 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 16 Jan 22 07:19

    <scribbled by jonl Sun 16 Jan 22 07:24>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #388 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 16 Jan 22 07:24

    
As someone who experienced the Texas power crisis of 2021, aka
snowpocalypse, I think it's worth saying that what people did, when
that happened, was go out of their way to help each other through
it. Notions of political contention were forgotten for a few days,
people were just helping each other survive.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #389 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 16 Jan 22 09:14

    
I'm back in Ibiza (briefly, I hope) so that I can assemble my QR
codes and depart for Texas presently.

The USA might have a violent civil war, but if they do something
that foolish and self-defeating, they'll simply hand their remaining
hegemony to the Chinese.  All the other world power-players will
behave as if the US has gone mad, and they will promptly sidle into
the direction of the nearest Belt and Road.  They won't be able to
dump their iPhones fast enough; Huawei and TikTok will both dance on
The Donald's grave.

I'm guessing there would be plenty of world military adventurism
during a US civil war, too.  For instance, the French might suddenly
say, "Hey, let's appoint Maximilian the Emperor of Mexico!"  But
mostly, a world with a broken USA would be a new arena for China.  

Even if one US faction quickly won an American civil war, the
winners be in much weaker world condition as the domestic "victors."
Global woes would multiply;  the American dollar's no good, nobody
wants US military bases, the US Big Tech platform companies are in
rags and shadows; all the billionaires have ditched their Green
Cards, Wall Street is a ghost town.  The post-civil-war USA would
become Patient Zero in the Imperial Overstretch Clinic.

That leaves one wondering what a Chinese hegemonic world might look
like.  If it did arrive, it might arrive sooner than we know.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #390 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 16 Jan 22 09:14

    

The obvious answer -- "what is it like"? -- has a ready answer.  
It's like Tibet, Xinjiang and Hong Kong.  If you're Tibet you get
subsumed.  If you're Xinjiang, you react badly and you get some
heavy digital manners and some re-education camps. If you're Hong
Kong, you make some noise about free markets and rule of law, but
the charm of those buzzwords has worn off for the Politburo. 
They've lost respect for these alleged systemic advantages of
Westernization; they believe that all this American-style legalizing
and financializing doesn't make a nation richer or more powerful. 
So the Chinese bosses strangled their supposed golden goose of  Hong
Kong, and the Chinese man in the street was fine with that.  Hong
Kong was decadent and messy, anyhow; modern China doesn't need any
troublesome middle-men to handle the outside world.

There's a fellow named Peng Jingtang, who used to be chief of staff
for the "People's Armed Police" in Xinjiang. He was recently
promoted to be boss of the People's Liberation Army troops in Hong
Kong.  I think this indicates that China is satisfied with their
consistent line over the various elements they've subjugated.  You
won't get loose, no matter how poor or rich you are.  How harshly
you get treated by the Empire is up to you.  

Nothing too amazing about all this, it's pretty standard for
land-empires.  I follow some Chinese wolf-warriors on Twitter who
are keen to compare Xinjiang (a paradise) to what the USA did to
Native Americans (ruthless genocide).  They're swaggeringly
convinced by their historical arguments, too, and keen to dish out
some of the same to Taiwan.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #391 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 16 Jan 22 09:16

    

The major element that seems different in MMXXII is, well,
"Communism."  China is a Communist state with a hammer and sickle on
the flag, and constantly celebrating Communist Party anniversaries,
so how come they don't feed and shelter other people's Communist
Parties?  Shouldn't they encourage other people to become ardent
Communists, to rebel, to overthrow the rich, and to become like
China?  Mao Zedong used to exhort that revolution all the time;
there were Maoist parties all over the Third World, and even some
Maoist cliques in the likes of France and Italy.  

How come there's not eager foreigners waving Little Red Books of "Xi
Jinping Thought" and quoting Xi's aphorisms?  China's much more
powerful now than during Mao's heyday.  Life in Xi's China is vastly
better than life in Mao's China.

I think the reason is that they've become patriots, not Communists. 
They're Chinese ethnonationals with an identity politics.  They no
longer care what you, or they, think about Communism; they want you
to buy into their Belt and Road 5G infrastructure.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #392 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 16 Jan 22 09:16

    
Most imperial hegemons are, normally,  keen on civilizing you to
their standards.  They want to teach you their language and dress
you in their clothes.  Cosmopolitan soft power, "Coca-Colonization,"
all of that.

The Chinese lack a taste for this behavior.  Whenever you imitate
them, instead of patting you on the head and giving you Most Favored
Nation status, they get all annoyed about it.  They even repress
Chinese pop stars who win foreign admirers.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #393 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 16 Jan 22 09:17

    

In MMXXII, the best pupil of Xi Jinping Thought is obviously
Narendra Modi, the current Prime Minister of India.  Modi is a guy
who studies China with intelligent care, and is full of autocratic
instincts of his own.  Modi thinks that India's Parliamentary
democracy is a corrupt mess of useless featherbedders and petty
rajahs who get in the way of modernity.   Modi would much prefer a
one-party state of dedicated Hindu activists who rule through
overwhelming moral suasion and example, with him as a benevolent
Emperor Akbar who directs the nation with his sweeping, inspired
decrees.

So Modi likes to swing the sceptre: he often does unexpected Xi
Jinping-like strikes against the Indian status quo, such as
abolishing paper currencies, and naming-and-numbering all the
subjects on Aadhaar computers, and, especially, pulling a fierce
Xinjiang on the restive province of Kashmir.

I think Modi has it figured that the Chinese are the way forward. 
Modi perceives that the British have stupidly pulled a Yugoslavia,
while the Americans are electing obvious frauds and hucksters who
aren't worth his time.  Modi's ideal future India is dynamic,
trade-centric, high-tech.  It's an India on the Moon and Mars, with
Indian smart cities and Bangalore tech giants and a blue-water
global navy.  A grand, much-respected, jewel-resplendent India
that's the awe and wonder of all the locals: Bangladesh, Burma, Sri
Lanka, the Maldives, Nepal.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #394 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 16 Jan 22 09:17

    

I may not personally approve of imperial ambitions, but at least I
can see that it's a rational realpolitik that Metternich or
Kissinger would have no trouble understanding.  Most non-Indians
aren't much troubled with India; the world's diplomatic corps is
cordial about India.  India is "non-aligned," they're easy to bribe,
they mostly mind their own internal business.  You rarely see India
pick a big bloody fight with anybody, except for their evil
twin-brother Pakistan.  Small client states nearby are plenty afraid
of India, but nobody else is.

So why does China want to start and sustain a Cold War border-fight
with India? Why harass them?  Why now, in MMXXII, when there are so
many better issues than some barren mountains?  You'd think that the
Chinese would flatter Modi.  Modi does imitate the Chinese, so they
ought to patronize him.   By his tacit agreement that their methods
work best, Modi validates them. He makes them look like the
avant-garde.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #395 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 16 Jan 22 09:18

    

A friendly India would offer China big benefits.  There's plenty of
profitable belt-and-road development work to be done in India, with
a huge consumer base for Chinese products and services  If China and
India were trade allies, clearly the Chinese would dominate. 
Despite being Communists,  they're much better at business.

Also, an armed border quarrel with India gains the Chinese anything,
except for a loud and visible quarrel with India.  Nobody else sees
fit to pick quarrels with India, so the spat makes the Chinese look
cranky, peevish and bent on acts of humiliation.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #396 of 420: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 16 Jan 22 09:19

    

But the Chinese are jealous.  The Indians annoy them.  They can't
abide an India that seeks to out-China China. Especially, one
semi-divine technocrat can't bear the presence in Asia of another
semi-divine technocrat. 

 Xi Jinping and Narendra Modi are too much alike to be pals.  
China's the aggressor in the Sino-Indian relationship because China
lacks tact.  They'd rather punch noses than form an axis of
authoritarianism.

A wilier China would blandly assure India that "Some day -- in the
future --you'll be the greatest!"  That's what everybody else always
tells the Indians, feeling secure in their conviction that India is
the country of the future and always will be.   But China can't
imagine a geopolitical situation for India that Indians might be
content about.  The Chinese have a grievance, so they need to make
sure that India has a worse one; not the grievances India already
has, which are plenty, but some brand-new grievances stamped "Made
in China."

I suspect that a China that was the greatest power on Earth would
have even  harder time with India.  It's not some standard
international fuss, about trade wars, the ideology, the religions or
the lack thereof.  The Chinese don't even hate the Indians, or have
any particular sense of historic, revanchist grudge,  or feel a
genuine military threat from them.  It's a clash-of-civilizations
that a planetary hegemon ought to be able to serenely overlook. 
They can't seem to be suave about it.  I wonder why.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #397 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 16 Jan 22 10:15

    
I wonder what's the best way to handle hypothetical threats. I'm a
big fan of disaster preparation, and I think we don't do enough.

On the other hand, we get one shoe bomber and then everyone has to
take off their shoes for decades. Is this sensible?

So I wonder about this scenario about an organized group of
malcontents taking out the electrical grid. How do we weigh that
against all the other hypothetical scenarios and come up with
sensible disaster planning? Is it another shoe bomber thing, or is
it more like preparing for a pandemic?

Hurricanes and ice storms are also threats to electrical grids and I
think they need to be given their due as well. It seems like
usually, in rural areas anyway, we assume that sometimes electrical
grids go down, and we need to plan to get by off-grid for a while
and repair them afterwards. Hopefully we can learn some things from
what happened in Puerto Rico and Texas.

I also wonder what we should learn from California, where the big
vulnerability for the electrical grid is the risk of bankruptcy from
starting a fire. You don't need to take out infrastructure. You just
need the power company to be sufficiently afraid of what might
happen to refuse to provide service.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #398 of 420: Kevin Driscoll (driscoll) Sun 16 Jan 22 10:54

    
One source of instability and unrest in the US that we haven't
discussed is the burden placed on caretakers by the conditions of
pandemic. Whether professionals or family members, care workers all
over the country are feeling burned out and left behind. For those
who care for children or the elderly, there was no "hot vax summer,"
no time to mess around with NFTs, no opportunity to muse about
geopolitics. Do we see brighter days ahead for caretakers in the US?
Could this group become a distinct political constituency? Are there
models outside the US we should be following?

See also: Anne Helen Petersen's latest newsletter, "Why No One Can
Hear Parents Screaming."
<https://annehelen.substack.com/p/why-no-one-can-hear-parents-screaming>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #399 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 16 Jan 22 11:00

    
Meanwhile we probably should pay more attention to attackers who
have a business model:

Hackers disrupt payroll for thousands of employers — including
hospitals
<https://www.npr.org/2022/01/15/1072846933/kronos-hack-lawsuits>

> In the weeks since the attack knocked out Kronos Private Cloud — a
service that includes some of the nation's most popular workforce
management software — employees from Montana to Florida have
reported paychecks short by hundreds or thousands of dollars, as
their employers have struggled to manage schedules and track hours
without the help of the Kronos software.

> Though Ultimate Kronos Group, the company that makes Kronos, says
that it expects systems will be back online by the end of January,
affected employers say they don't yet know for sure when they will
actually be able to access their systems and information.

I'm wondering when the ransomware wave finally peaks?

One thing you can say about Bitcoin is that miners getting chased
out of China and Kazakhstan doesn't seem to have affected
operations. On the other hand, so far it makes for a lousy payroll
system. Good enough for paying ransoms, though.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #400 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 16 Jan 22 11:08

    
Bruce: a shotgun of minor footnotes.

* I think you're spot on about China. I don't follow Chinese
internal political nearly as closely as I should, given their
enormous power and importance, so it's really nice to get a read of
how they're wielding it. 

Do you think the Chinese can apply the HK/Tibet model to any place
that isn't ethnically and culturally deeply influence by China
already? Singapore is a little more diverse, but I'm thinking Dubai
or Namibia. 

* My 2100 prediction: China, with an excellent history of handling
steady state centuries, has taken over administration of earth
within climatic boundaries. They've centralized essentially all
manufacturing because it's more efficient that way particularly in
ecological terms.

But America does nearly all the space colonization, because American
culture is a frontier culture in both myth and mindset and the
living conditions are hard, the dangers intense, and the profits (if
you live long enough to see them) staggering. 

* Modi -> BJP -> RSS -> Nath Sampradaya. (BJP = Republicans, RSS =
Hindu Identarians, Naths = Knights Templar army blessing priest
group).

The history goes back to the original Muslim invasion of India, an
event that many Hindus regard as fondly as the Irish recall the
British invasion and for similar reasons. Some choose to fight
rather than to submit, and Nepal becomes their stronghold. They
tough it out without falling under the yoke for roughly a thousand
years.

Yogi Adityanath (a Nath Sampradaya monk turned politician, roughly
equivalent to the Governor of California - runs UP which is 260
million people) and his predecessors are of the form of Hinduism
which was sheltered in Nepal by the battles fought by (among others)
the Gurkhas, who are the lineage brothers of the Naths. The Naths
have been agitating at flash points like Ayodhya since the middle of
the last century. It's basically a Reconquista as the Naths and the
Nepali strain of Hinduism in general tries to recolonize the rest of
India.

https://journals.openedition.org/samaj/6778?lang=fr - Yogi
Adityanath, the RSS and so on.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayodhya_dispute

* full disclosure: I am now almost 20 years in the Nath Sampradaya.
I don't agree with all of the politics folks like Adityanath are up
to these days but I am far from a disinterested observer of these
events.

* final point: water, water, water. Huge disputes about the water
coming out of the Himalayas
https://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/brahmaputra-river-china-dam-
india-china-relation-7061644/ as the Chinese begin to exploit their position.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #401 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 16 Jan 22 11:39

    
Brian Slesinsky: I worked on this specific problem for most of a
decade. Eventually I distilled it down to a single easy to read
short high level briefing document.

In essence it says this: whatever happens, people must not be too
hot, too cold, hungry, thirsty, ill, or injured. If they die it will
be of one of these six causes. Most of the time the risk is
concentrated at the systemic level: a flood kills a few, but
epidemic waterborne disease spreads afterwards as sanitation fails.
That sort of thing. There are huge commonalities: almost any really
dangerous epidemic is going to be spread through the air, so N95
masks block danger across a wide range of scenarios, both known risk
and unforeseen future hazards. Add bleach and gloves. The
commonalities between crises are strong: people's basic needs and
basic biology do not change - they must have water, whatever the
circumstances.

http://resiliencemaps.org/files/Dealing_in_Security.July2010.en.pdf

That's the doc with the model. It was designed for multidisciplinary
groups of non-specialists (mayor, chief of police, hospital
administrator, power company rep, water company rep, big box food
store rep) to be able to do short range planning work after a crisis
has become inevitable or (more realistically) after a crisis has
already started.

It's a pretty light read. The real impact does not come until you
draw out the diagrams for yourself, and map your own life on them. 

Then it will open your head like a can opener.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #402 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sun 16 Jan 22 11:40

    
Interesting.

Vinay, regarding your <384>, yes I do remember Hakim Bey and his work
may indeed be the proximate cause of some persistent metaphysical chaos.

But I'm much more impressed with the hard work Daniel Kahneman and
others have done to establish "a cognitive basis for common human
errors that arise from heuristics and biases" (as his Wikipedia page
puts it).  He got a Nobel Prize in economics in 2002.

But economic thinking is just an instance of human thinking. The real
discovery is that human rationality is not what we thought it was!
                                    ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #403 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 16 Jan 22 12:12

    
Craig Maudlin: I think the point where deep thinkers started to
integrate the idea of rolling your own reality, and then living
inside of it, was really Hakim Bey. John Lilly, Tim Leary, Robert
Anton Wilson, Antero Alli all worked with the notion but largely as
an *individual* phenomena. "Programming and metaprogramming the
human biocomputer."

Hakim Bey's breakthrough was to tie this phenomena to a *place*
rather than to an individual: in this *place* - this zone - the
rules are different. Two realities, one square reality outside of
the zone, and something more customized and comfortable inside of
it. Sneaks out by degrees until Burning Man.

But a mutated form of that viewpoint latches elsewhere, leading to
the whole "reality based community" schism 20 years ago where the
American leadership made it perfectly clear that *they* decided what
was real and the world would follow them.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reality-based_community From there to
the present situaiton where *EVERYBODY* is creating new realities
and trying to force people to live inside of them.

Interestingly one thing which has gotten left behind in all this
customization of reality is the idea that other people's realities
are just as real as ours are. Once the metaphysic of "we create our
own reality" is pushed beyond the individual - to groups, to
governments, to places - it starts to require enforcement. Getting
people to conform to a world model is a fundamental drive in many
social movements now, up to and including the anti-vaxxers and the
flat earthers.

Perhaps there are good reasons why knowledge about the subjective
nature of reality was often a closely held secret.

But the cat is out of the bag now and it looks to me like our sense
of *what is real* is going to keep on shattering until either we hit
some new universal boundary, or (more likely) the world becomes an
unintelligible mosaic and we define our position in it by action
rather than by understanding.

Absolutely right about cognitive biases: I'm sure they are being
weaponized at scale too (how much of targeted advertising is just
spaced repetition so that when you want something you buy the thing
you saw a few weeks ago?). That's a huge discovery.

I feel like this is sort of a two level thing: reality tunnel type
thinking broke the map, and the limits to rationality then cause us
to be unable to clearly read the street signs: no wonder we are so
lost.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #404 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 16 Jan 22 12:20

    
I suppose this is also "death of god" territory: religious
conservatives trying to force reality back into a single world model
with two genders and gender roles fortified by things like limiting
access to first abortion then birth control. 

It's hard to govern or make law across a society which doesn't exist
inside of a single broad consensus on *what is real*. Do vaccines
work? Are a lot of people harmed by them? Was covid a lab accident
or did it get started in a meat market? Was Jan6 an abortive coup or
just a hysterical crowd acting out?

I feel like people much sharper than I am about this stuff
(anthropologists?) have written a lot about it, perhaps in more
veiled and indirect terms, but this breaking of the world into
Bable-like shards is going to be with us for a while yet, and I (for
one) don't know how best to navigate it.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #405 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 16 Jan 22 12:30

    
Texas's power grid was developed in isolation from other states in
order to avoid federal regulation. The power companies don't pay
attention to the in-state regulators who warned that the grid was
vulnerable to extreme weather. The grid needs to be rebuilt with the
flexibility that would enable effective use of wind energy,
including transmission from places where the wind is blowing right
now to places where it isn't and interconnects to other grids for
import and export of electricity. These changes would also make the
grid more resilient when the weather gets really bad. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #406 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 16 Jan 22 12:42

    
More effective use of wind and renewable energy will be helpful
longer term, but the near term issue is weatherization of power
plants and transmission systems. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #407 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 16 Jan 22 12:50

    
Which wouldn't have been as disastrous if it had been possible to
import electricity, for example from the TVA.

The changes that would make possible more effective use of wind
energy would also decentralize the grid and make it less brittle.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #408 of 420: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 16 Jan 22 13:25

    
(really like response #398).
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #409 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 16 Jan 22 13:40

    
Looked at from a security standpoint, relying on electricity
transfer between regions seems risky? That's a very long supply line
and could be vulnerable to either wildfires or enemy action. It
seems like it might be infrastructure for a more peaceful and stable
climate than we have?

I guess they could be combined as long as you do a disaster drill
now and then. Regular service outages, as some areas in California
have to worry about due to fire danger, will tend to encourage more
disaster preparation.

If outages don't happen on their own then you need to schedule them.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #410 of 420: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 16 Jan 22 13:45

    
> The changes that would make possible more effective use of 
> wind energy would also decentralize the grid and make it 
> less brittle.

Maybe, but that would require a political shift that is happening
too slowly in Texas to get us where we need to be before the next
ice storm. Which could be any year, even this year.

I heard a legislator (don't recall which one) saying that a huge
part of the problem was freezing at gas transmission facilities,
which should have been designated to retain power during emergency
shutdowns. He said part of the difficulty there was identifying all
of the facilities that would need to be included. I'm not expecting
a quick fix, though hopeful that overall the energy providers are
taking the deep freeze weatherization need seriously.

> relying on electricity transfer between regions seems risky

My understanding is that it's not unusual, but Texas won't allow it
because it would open the state to federal regulation and fees.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #411 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 16 Jan 22 13:49

    
Meanwhile in supply line news, just protecting the cargo is becoming
an issue. It's not just Somalian pirates anymore:

Rail thefts leave tracks littered with pilfered packages
<https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2022-01-16/rail-theft-soars-los-angel
es-pilfered-packages-littering-tracks>

> Union Pacific reported what it claimed was a 160% increase since
December 2020 in thefts along the railroad tracks in L.A. County.
The railroad didn’t release specific data on what was stolen or the
value of what was lost, but it said the increase in crime cost the
company at least $5 million last year.

> A bottleneck in the supply chain and the presence of homeless
encampments near rail lines have contributed to the thefts,
officials said.

> “Organized and opportunistic criminal rail theft ... impacts our
employees, our customers in the overall supply chain industry,” said
Adrian Guerrero, a director of public affairs for Union Pacific.

> Guerrero estimates that about 90 cargo containers a day are
compromised, sometimes by an organized group that has halted trains
and recruited people living on the street to ransack the containers.

> Union Pacific is deploying more drones, has brought in extra
security and enlisted the Los Angeles Police Department, California
Highway Patrol and the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department to
combat the thefts, Guerrero said.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #412 of 420: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 16 Jan 22 13:52

    
<410>: That's a sane way to address the problem. I'm under no
illusion that Texas will do it.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #413 of 420: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sun 16 Jan 22 14:18

    
Vinay Gupta:

> I think the point where deep thinkers started to
> integrate the idea of rolling your own reality, and then living
> inside of it, was really Hakim Bey.

I mean to take nothing away from Hakim Bey. There is certainly a sense
of 'constructed reality' for which I completely agree with you.

But consider magic -- literally (I was a Magician for a short time).

We might say that a magician constructs an alternate reality and extends
it to encompass an audience. Today, magicians do this to entertain. But
there's evidence that early forms of magic ritual practice have always
been part of human culture. Not for entertainment purposes but to more
directly influence (or manipulate?) the behavior of others. It was
used as a kind of show of power.

If we look at magic in terms of the physics, psychology, neuroscience,
and a bit of the semiotics involved, we can see pretty clearly how Magic
works. Cognitive biases, heuristics, and illusions all seem to be
related. The difference between illusion and reality may just be belief.

But the magician's constructed realities are highly constrained -- the
opposite of anarchy. Part of the trick includes keeping the audience
from seeing the limits -- and encourages the audience to accept that
what the magician has done means that anything is possible.

> But the cat is out of the bag now and it looks to me like our sense
> of *what is real* is going to keep on shattering until either we hit
> some new universal boundary, or (more likely) the world becomes an
> unintelligible mosaic and we define our position in it by action
> rather than by understanding.

I'm hoping that a better understanding of how the magic tricks work
will expose more of the constraints (the aspects of the magician's
reality) that's being hidden.

So, for the small percentage of flat earthers that are true believers,
we can move from asking "How can they possibly think that?" to "Oh, now
we can see why they think that way and *why*!"

And the 'why' includes understanding the motivations of the actors
(the magicians) involved.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #414 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 16 Jan 22 14:36

    
<401> that's a great abstraction for security issues, thanks!

As you say it needs to be get fleshed out with specifics. People who
are willing to do their homework could come up with something
meaningful to them.

I'm thinking, though, that most people won't. Seeing it fleshed out
for someone else's community might be interesting, though.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #415 of 420: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Sun 16 Jan 22 14:42

    
There was a derailment today at the train looting site, if that was
done on purpose to loot more cargo it's rather an escalation.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #416 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 16 Jan 22 15:39

    
Brian Slesinsky: Thank you!

Yes, it's proven to be a *hard* sell - http://resiliencemaps.org has
a very well worked out case for the Canary Islands in the event of a
respiratory tract infection pandemic (a pandemic flu, but much the
same as covid in general trajectory). Other than that, *crickets*.

Some of this is because people perceive it as bleak: "can't you make
it six ways to live?"

It also starts with the individual and works up, rather than
starting with Continuity of Government and working down as most
people in the industry would find natural ("that's why it starts
with the individual, sir, because normally it would start with
you").

https://archive.org/details/TheGuptaStateFailureManagementArchive
the Ireland video in there is a group of Irish climate change /
financial system doomers in a workshop making a total population
mortality estimate for Ireland in the event of a global economic
collapse resulting in a loss of all imports and exports.

It's surprisingly not that bad, around 3%. This is because Ireland
has a very low population density, due to the famines and mass
migration out of the green isle. The same methodology produces about
a 30% mortality estimate for America under the same circumstances.

Cheery.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #417 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 16 Jan 22 16:15

    
Craig Maudlin: An awful lot of things which are considered to be
magic in the west, literally *magic* like ritual magic etc. are
considered to be normal parts of an average person's religious
practice in India.

You know, all those statues we keep around? They're ritualistically
infused with the life-breath of the practitioner, brought to life,
considered to be alive, treated as alive, treated as sacred, and if
they have to be moved or something they're *de sanctified* by
withdrawing the breath of life from them and then they're simply
objects again and can be put in a crate. When you have an entire
civilization that works that way on a fairly regular day to day
basis, you can imagine what the serious students of The Art are
learning under titles like Raja Yoga and Jnana Yoga or Kriya Yoga.
In India it's just kinda how things are done, nobody thinks of it as
mystical or esoteric, but if you put those routines into the cant of
the Golden Dawn it would be three days of ceremonial ritual
purifications for the moving guys before they were allowed to take
the statue down and put it in the van!

It's all the same *stuff* it's just in India its at such a scale and
so normalized that in no way shape or form is it perceived as magic:
it's just like good manners and politeness to the gods and other
people, a sort of "take your shoes off at the door" procedural
psychic hygiene that looks like magic in a low-magic culture, but
looks like hand washing in a high magic culture.

The reason I'm zooming in on Hakim Bey is this: I think Hakim Bey
subtly broke the world. Like I think he's patient zero for the kind
of postmodernism which enables people to want to force their reality
tunnel on the world *knowing that it is their own construction and
not actually real*. Robert Anton Wilson and co very carefully didn't
discuss how reality tunnels spread between people, how people are
recruited into reality tunnels and so on. They kept it as an
individual practice.

Bey makes it clear that groups share reality tunnels: temporary
autonomous Zone.

Well, that winds up as Tumblr Autonomous Zone pretty quick: people
are brewing up reality tunnels of their own (see: otherkin) and then
insisting to other people that these homebrew realities are
*completely real* and on a par with (say) medical science or orbital
mechanics. They organize vicious cancellation gangs to try and force
their reality tunnels on each other, using a sense that to go
against and outside of the Otherkin reality tunnel makes somebody
into A Bad Person because they're violating somebody else's human
rights by not believing they are a reincarnation of some specific
Pokemon.

I trace this like an infection back to Bey, because I think he gave
the idea of shared reality tunnels as active processes to a lot of
people - not least the San Francisco Cacophony Society - who then
ported it to Burning Man. I think it went through Genesis P Orridge
through TOPY/TOPI into Tumblr, although I don't know who the
intermediaries were. It's a genealogy of ideas, and a practice.

A bit like how chaos magic took root on the far right before Trump
got elected
https://datacide-magazine.com/a-fascist-tulpa-in-the-white-house-right-wing-me
me-magic-and-the-rise-of-trump/ and then they all freaked out because Trump, *in practice*, was the Stay-Puft Marshmallow Man from Ghostbusters.

So I think the patient zero for "design your own reality then export
it to everybody else" is Hakim Bey. And of course the problem with
Bey is the extremely intense proximity of his personal life to
various aspects of pedophilia. The pain of that discovery broke
hearts all over the anarchist world.

I don't want to dig all of this out here, but I want to suggest that
a very dangerous and flawed variation on the idea that "how you see
the world is your mental furniture and you can rearrange it whenever
you like" has taken root in the culture. People are taking belief
systems which *are not OK* and are harmful to the people sucked into
them - shitcoin ponzi schemes in the blockchain space are often
built around a charismatic leader - and they're consciously
exporting these realities to other people *who then believe them as
if they are real*. 

It's an explosion of what amounts to secular cult activity as these
warring reality tunnels smash into each other through social media
and cancellation events: "you are no longer part of our reality, JK
Rowling."

I don't know if there's any way of getting this particular
postmodern genie back in its bottle. Maybe some kinds of sacred
knowledge, no matter how dangerous they are, become parts of the
vernacular and there's no getting them back. "we all create our own
reality" goes from a hippie truism to a presidential platform in a
couple of generations.

If we can't recontain this insight or somehow persuade the general
public to lose interest in it - and that seems *VERY* unlikely given
the explosion of psychedelic capitalism happening as drugs are
decriminalized in America - then we're in a position where we're
going to be teaching reality tunnel management and point-of-view
hygiene to the public, hoping that they'll learn to maintain their
own minds and become resistant to weaponized memes intended to
over-write their reality tunnel with that of the psychic aggressor.

Virtual reality and drugs are both very likely to put
ever-increasing stress on the idea of a single monolithic "real" -
the cartesian plane filled with people and things and events. But
regulating people's realities and protecting them from bad realities
sounds like a reign of magician-kings more than democracy.

Trump as a bad magician-king, pulling people up the pied-piper path
into an alternate reality in which covid is a democratic disease and
Q might be a close friend of his?

What kind of politics can fight that? Not Princess Moonbeam, not
this time, that's for sure
https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020-election/marianne-williamson-drops-out-2
020-presidential-race-n1113676
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #418 of 420: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 16 Jan 22 16:21

    
Loss of all imports and exports is quite the doom scenario. When I
think of a collapse of trade I think of North Korea or Cuba. Living
under economic sanctions on purpose seems weird? (Which is why I
think Mars is silly. There are many remote places here on Earth, any
of which would be a warmer place to live and with lower shipping
delays.)

As an electronics tinkerer I am very aware of my utter dependence on
distant electronics factories, global shipping, and hardware
distributors.

It seems more realistic (we've lived it, briefly) to prepare for
supply chain brownouts and delays rather than total blockades? The
kind of disaster preparation I'm into is about getting cut off for a
limited time, though maybe longer than you'd ideally like.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #419 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 16 Jan 22 16:36

    
Brian Slesinsky: the Irish were concerned, if I remember correctly,
that a global financial system meltdown would hard-stop world trade
for years, a bit like a black grid - and they're a small island
without much money, not America.

Doomers gonna doom. They were a bit disappointed that it was 3%
mortality  at the end of the workshop, not 50%.

The memory of the Famine is strong. They thought it would be like
that again. It wasn't.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #420 of 420: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Sun 16 Jan 22 16:45

    
Craig Maudlin: back to cognitive biases.

https://www.visualcapitalist.com/50-cognitive-biases-in-the-modern-world/

This sort of stuff seems like a modernized tarot deck to me, where
one introspects on each card and finds the places in your life where
that cognitive bias has led to bad outcomes.

The notion of a modern mystery tradition built around cognitive
biases strikes me as more or less where the Rationalist community
got started - maybe they didn't realize they were a mystery
tradition when they started, but hey... rationality turns out to be
hard and paradoxical in extremely unexpected ways, and they've
turned Less Wrong into some kind of weird Silicon Valley accelerator
for new cults (I think.)

What do we do with the limits to our own rationality, once we can
define them?
  
inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #421 of 434: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 16 Jan 22 20:45

    
When you start seeing the cracks in Rationality, it's time to check
out David Chapman's writing, such as <https://metarationality.com/>.

(It's unfinished, but I think it's a pretty description of the
limits of logic and statistics, and the distinction between
"reasonable" and "rational" thinking is pretty good.)

--

Speaking of cognitive biases, I usually think of aesthetic
considerations as fairly shallow but you can't deny their impact in
making things seem familiar or foreign. We might take the polarizing
aesthetic that cryptocurrency has for example. What is going on
there?

The moon rockets, diamond hands, laser eyes, and bored apes clearly
have their appeal to a core crowd and that's why companies in this
space lean into it. Even traditional finance has gotten into the
game, the better to attract the meme stock crowd.

So it's understandable. But it's hard to give cryptocurrency a fair
chance when I find the aesthetic repellent. (Not that I'm entirely
immune. I got into DogeCoin because I thought it was a fun joke, but
that was when I thought we were throwing coins at each other on
Reddit *ironically*, something like Mardi Gras beads.)

Giving a gold bar a jokey name might help it sell better than your
average everyday gold bar, and even get some people to consider
buying one who wouldn't ordinarily think of buying a gold bar at
all. But it isn't going to make Ricardian contracts seem
respectable, is it?

But I'm out of touch and probably the last person anyone should
listen to for marketing advice.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #422 of 434: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 16 Jan 22 21:11

    
"It is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances. The true
mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible...." oscar
wilde. because really, we all respond to the cues that tell us 'is
this for me? or is this not of my tribe?"
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #423 of 434: George Mokray (jonl) Mon 17 Jan 22 00:22

    
Via email from George Mokray:

According to the NYTimes, the daily death toll of COVID in USAmerica
was 1964 on January 16, 2022.  I thank them for that information and
the good piece on the development of mRNA vaccines they recently
published.  When I wrote there is little to no mention of this fact,
the fact I was referring to is the very little coverage I’ve seen
about the ongoing ramifications of that daily death toll.  At least,
not in the papers I read (NYTimes, WashPost, BBC, Guardian…)  We are
not publicly processing the reality of this number of excess deaths,
not actively facing what it actually means.  The best I’ve seen on
the historic overview is this interview with Nick Christakis:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TZhr8Hz03jY

I saw a tweet today which went:  what if we all got vaccinated,
locked ourselves down for a month, wore N95 masks when we went out
for essentials only.  That would, in all probability, end the
pandemic right there.  If ALL of us really did that.  But we’ve
muddled into an endemic pandemic and the new normal seems, now, to
be a regular rotation of new variants and boosters with no end in
sight.

This kind of refusal to deal with obvious ramifications, existential
ramifications, (and obvious solutions) also applies to climate and
the inability to imagine anything other than tweaks to business as
usual.  It is odd to me that the Green New Deal and Build Back
Better are, in some ways, less ambitious than Jimmy Carter’s 1979
energy plan which called for 20% of our energy from renewables by
the year 2000 (we’re about there now, 20 years behind his schedule)
and insulating 90% of our homes to higher standards by 1985.

Personally, I believe that we can draw enough carbon down out of the
sky by the end of the century to return to pre-industrial levels,
about 270 ppm (we’re at over 418 ppm now), by using geotherapy,
helping existing ecosystems amplify the natural carbon cycle,
consistently and globally from now on.  The best resources on
geotherapy I know of are at
http://solarray.blogspot.com/2021/04/geotherapy-not-geoengineering-please.html


Of course, we will have to zero out greenhouse gas emissions too in
order to accomplish this.

But again, I don’t see this geotherapeutic possibility in the public
conversation.  I don’t see us discussing a unifying vision of a
positive future that we can start building now, which is the only
way, I believe, you can build a future.  I’d start from Solar IS
Civil Defense, prepare for the next weather emergency whatever you
think about climate in a way that will increase resilience (and
speed the necessary transition), and proceed from there to solar
swadeshi.  I say that every year here to little discernable effect
though I still think it is a practical and affordable way forward.

For me, the livable future was pioneered and modeled by New Alchemy
Institute but it seems it takes too much work to ever catch on.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #424 of 434: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 17 Jan 22 04:55

    
George Mokray:

I've got a slightly dim awareness of New Alchemy - "living machines"
that purify water and produce fish and fertilizer is what I
remember.

What else did they do? What's good to read about NAI? I hear they
were absolute wizards, but it's harder to get hold of their material
than (say) Buckminster Fuller!

Could you post some links, please?
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #425 of 434: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 17 Jan 22 06:01

    
Xi Jinping is Green-New-Dealing it over at Davos.

https://news.cgtn.com/news/2022-01-17/Full-text-Xi-Jinping-s-address-to-2022-W
orld-Economic-Forum-16TN5povxKM/index.html

– China will stay committed to promoting ecological conservation. As
I have said many times, we should never grow the economy at the cost
of resource depletion and environmental degradation, which is like
draining a pond to get fish; nor should we sacrifice growth to
protect the environment, which is like climbing a tree to catch
fish. 

Guided by our philosophy that lucid waters and lush mountains are
invaluable assets, China has carried out holistic conservation and
systematic governance of its mountains, rivers, forests, farmlands,
lakes, grasslands and deserts. We do everything we can to conserve
the ecological system, intensify pollution prevention and control,
and improve the living and working environment for our people. China
is now putting in place the world's largest national parks system.
Last year, we successfully hosted COP15 to the Convention on
Biological Diversity, contributing China's share to a clean and
beautiful world. 

Achieving carbon peak and carbon neutrality are the intrinsic
requirements of China's own high-quality development and a solemn
pledge to the international community. China will honor its word and
keep working toward its goal. We have unveiled an Action Plan for
Carbon Dioxide Peaking Before 2030, to be followed by implementation
plans for specific sectors such as energy, industry and
construction. China now has the world's biggest carbon market and
biggest clean power generation system: the installed capacity of
renewable energy has exceeded one billion kilowatts, and the
construction of wind and photovoltaic power stations with a total
installed capacity of 100 million kilowatts is well under way.
Carbon peak and carbon neutrality cannot be realized overnight.
Through solid and steady steps, China will pursue an orderly
phase-down of traditional energy in the course of finding reliable
substitution in new energy. This approach, which combines phasing
out the old and bringing in the new, will ensure steady economic and
social development. China will also actively engage in international
cooperation on climate and jointly work for a complete transition to
a greener economy and society. 
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #426 of 434: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 17 Jan 22 06:54

    
Vinay, 

Wikipedia has an article on New Alchemy Institute:
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Alchemy_Institute>

The NAI website is here: <https://newalchemists.net/>

Here's a good article about NAI:
<https://medium.com/age-of-awareness/the-new-alchemy-institute-d0992ce33a68>

A pdf of "New Alchemy's First 20 Years":
<https://newalchemists.files.wordpress.com/2015/01/new-alchemys-first-20-years.
pdf>

Links to issues of The Journal of the New Alchemists:
<https://newalchemists.net/publications/new-alchemy-1971-1991/>
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #427 of 434: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 17 Jan 22 07:04

    
In <382> I erroneously posted that "... Tuesday the 17th is our last
day, though people might hang out and keep posting past that date."

Obviously, today (Monday) is the 17th.

So today is the formal last day of the conversation, though
participants can keep posting as long as they like - we're a long
way from the potential maximum number of posts.

I want to thank Bruce, Vinay, Emily, and all the others on and off
the WELL who've contributed posts. Barring apocalypse (which seems
increasingly possible), Bruce and I will be back in January 2023.

I'm not thinking we came to any conclusions, as usual, but I hope
we've been raising the right questions. And who knows? By the end of
the day today, we might see a post that wraps the current state of
things all up in a neat package, with a bright red bow on top.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #428 of 434: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 17 Jan 22 08:14

    
Bruce Sterling: Xi Jinping is Green-New-Dealing it over at Davos.

Thank god *somebody* is doing the right thing. Pray god the American
far right doesn't start seeing US environmentalists as being
unpatriotic and corrupted by the Chinese!
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #429 of 434: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 17 Jan 22 08:16

    
Jon Lebkowsky: wow. It's been amazing - I've read these religiously
for so long, I can't believe I've done one now. <pinches self> must
be dreaming.

Thank you all!
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #430 of 434: Vinay Gupta (hexayurt) Mon 17 Jan 22 08:18

    
Open Infrastructure Map https://openinframap.org/#8/32.661/-97.06
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #431 of 434: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 17 Jan 22 08:24

    
Insightful take on China and India, Bruce. The geopolitical center
continues to shift away from the post-WWII order of the U.S./NATO vs
… whatever, without the USSR to organize around, and in China’s
direction. I think that needs to be factored in to so much of what
Putin is doing on Russia’s western border, from the cyberattacks of
the Baltics to squashing Georgia to reabsorbing Ukraine. The former
KGB apparatchik was born into a global superpower and wants that
back desperately, even though there’s no ideological or geopolitical
reason for Russia to go back there.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #432 of 434: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 17 Jan 22 08:37

    
Vinay, infrastructure that can be turned into a bomb is a problem.
People have been pointing this out since “peaceful atom” propaganda
appeared not long after the U.S. used warlike atoms to usher in the
post-WWII Cold War. 

There’s a line of historical analysis that argues the U.S.
atom-bombed Hiroshima and Nagasaki to prevent the USSR from getting
occupation forces into Japan first. I don’t know that it’s
conclusive, but I find it persuasive.

Advocates for renewable energy have been pointing out for decades
that you can’t make a bomb out of a solar panel or a windmill, the
way you can with an oil refinery or a fossil fuel pipeline. They’re
up against more than a century of fossil fuel firms habituating the
public to using these incredibly dangerous, toxic substances in
daily life. A product like gasoline could never be approved for the
consumer market today.

However, I don’t think the problem is infrastructure. 

Many of the problems in the U.S. begin with one problem: endemic
racism among a majority of white Americans. 

From there a lot of things flow. For example, there was the Roger
Ailes generation of crafty, smart and resentful (Nixon resigning)
media people and political operatives harnessing that bigotry, using
successive waves of modern media: newspapers, cable TV, talk radio,
online engagement algorithms dictated largely by revenue goals
rather than human rights or strengthening democratic institutions.

One of the ideas they’ve been using these media to spread for more
than a couple decades now is the falsehood of insecure elections.
Liberals look back almost fondly now on George W Bush, now that
they’ve run the gauntlet of four Trump years. His administration is
the one that took this election fraud bullshit from local and state
party levels to the national.

Then we had a smug and sequestered class of liberal politicians who
were (and many still remain) congenitally unable to grasp and act on
how debased their “friends across the aisle” were becoming. They
have to raise money too, right? So, many of them let civil rights
coast on the legacy of the Civil and Voting Rights acts,
triangulated to support free trade, didn’t blink too much when James
Hansen told them in 1988 that climate disruption was already
underway.

THEN there’s the mainstream journalism sector with its collective
head in the sand, covering all this stuff like stenographers so that
it can keep elbows with the powerful at the Washington
correspondent’s dinner every year, regularly invoking its rights
under the First Amendment while never saying out loud that it
believed in democracy, because that would be expressing an OPINION,
good grief.

Then there’s the successful multi-decade campaign to transform the
legal interpretation of the Second Amendment into “owning guns is a
civil right.”

I could go on.

Ultimately, the cure for most of this is not gonna be a refugee-like
mass transfer of populations across state lines based on political
preference or affiliation, or creating American city-states. It’s
the slow incremental process of creating progressive change via mass
civic engagement. 

Building support for: defunding fossil fuel companies from their
public subsidies, nailing the politicians who’ve allowed themselves
to be bought by Big Carbon, restoring the rules that prevented media
consolidation and breaking up the consolidated, regulating social
media companies, reviving civics education…

…in my experience, people typically don’t like this answer. It lacks
a techno-magical edge.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #433 of 434: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 17 Jan 22 08:42

    
The concise way to say “endemic racism among a majority of white
Americans is “white supremacy.” Too bad using those two words
together in the U.S. became such a big reputation killer for 30 or
40 years.
  

inkwell.vue.516 : State of the World 2022
permalink #434 of 434: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 17 Jan 22 09:19

    
Thanks for inviting me, Jon. Thanks for the interesting and
challenging posts, Vinay and Bruce and everyone who’s joined us.
This has been the best conversation-in-a-coffee-shop I’ve had since
early 2020.
  

