inkwell.vue.459 : State of the World 2013: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
## 0 of 186: Cyborganic Host (jonl) Wed 26 Dec 12 07:21

    
Welcome to the 2013 edition of the Bruce Sterling/Jon Lebkowsky State
of the World conversation/rantfest. Bruce and Jon, old friends and
rambunctious digerati, have made this annual mess every year of the
21st century; this year's model should be particularly interesting,
given the current hyperactive state of the world and the abundance of
available conceptual lenses.

Bruce Sterling is a science fiction author, journalist, design
theorist and critic, public speaker, and world traveler. Currently
based in Serbia, he spends much of his time on the road, and has a
truly global perspective which you see in his novels, nonfiction
pieces, and his blog, "Beyond the Beyond." In addition to his novels,
Bruce has focused on the cutting edges of digital/hacker culture,
climate change, global politics, and contemporary design.  He founded
the Viridian Design movement, the Dead Media project, and is currently
fired up about the new aesthetic, augmented reality, and design
fiction.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruce_sterling.

Jon Lebkowsky has been an Internet evangelist and expert, web
consultant/developer, social commentator, gonzo futurist, media
analyst and critic, and sometimes activist. He was a cofounder of
FringeWare, Inc., an early digital culture company/community, and has
worked with and written for bOING bOING, Mondo 2000, Whole Earth,
Plutopia Productions, Digital Convergence Initiative, Wireless Future,
the Society for Participatory Medicine, EFF and EFF-Austin, the WELL,
WorldChanging, SXSW, Social Web Strategies, et al. Lately he's part of
a web development cooperative, Polycot Associates, and cofounder (with
Amber Case, Tyger AC, and Patrick Lichty) of Reality Augmented Blog
(http://realityaugmentedblog.com). 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Lebkowsky
  
## 1 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 26 Dec 12 08:00

    
The state of the world 2013 seems incoherent, unfathomable, often
terrible, often exhilarating. 

I’ve been immersed in the Internet ecosystem for almost two decades
now, and the surge of information has been increasing exponentially
throughout that time, a real firehose of data, much of it unstructured.
I devour more new facts in a day than my ancestors ate in a lifetime.
There’s a real richness to it, but there’s also powerful existential
indigestion. And when you swallow the world’s information, there are
inevitable toxins, so many raw, wild, and often conflicting chunks. 

In the 21st century, with so much knowledge created every day, hour,
minute, second, we have many sources of confusion: new studies reverse
the findings of older studies, new interpretations of facts radically
change perspectives, there’s a real crisis of authority, a question
whether we know what we know. 

I find myself questioning everything I read, hear - even what I see
with my own eyeballs... 
  
## 2 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 26 Dec 12 09:28

    

I'm glad to be here.  I'm glad to have the WELL here, too. I'm even
properly glad that the World is still here.

So, I happen to be in Belgrade this season, a city that's dear to me,
but not exactly a burg known for its straw-hat-and-cane light-comedy
material.  When living in Belgrade, I become a somber, ponderous,
literary guy.  A bespectacled, serious-minded character, in a long gray
gentleman's overcoat and  a Russian-style fur hat.  

I just bought the new fur hat for Xmas.  To tell the truth, the hat is
Swedish and 100% polyester fake fur.  However, it looks incredibly
Russian, and the locals compliment me on my dress-sense.

My personality changes with these differences in my locale.  Belgrade
is a spiritual home for me.  Italy is where I feel most intelligent.
Texas is where the heart is.  Traipsing from one to another is like
pitchforking a compost-heap.  It aerates me, somehow.  

From here in the Balkans, the state of the world can be pretty easy to
understand.  This world is a place of tragic gravity.   Great empires
go to the Balkans to perish.   A man's victory condition is a pained
and stubborn dignity in the face of the inevitable sordid oppressions. 

Of course, you're gonna be dishing out some of this suffering yourself
-- the guy in the shaving mirror is a malefactor too -- but there's
never much pressing need to reform your own behavior.  Of such crooked
timber as mankind, no straight world was ever built!  When the world
ends, it'll end in Belgrade ten years later because they never met the
international requirements.

Now, I've noticed  over the years that these Well State of the World
encounters commonly develop into a series of eloquent complaints from
everybody concerned.  Here in the Balkans, we are second to none in
that regard.  We complain even when things are going pretty good, so as
to keep up our guard against possible acts of treachery.

So -- before the inevitable doom that will beset this years' discourse
-- let me offer a few brief notes about some interest groups of 2013
who seem to be having a pretty good time.  They don't need to complain
much, because they're doing great.
  
## 3 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 26 Dec 12 09:38

    


#1. The  3d printer guys.  Just so interesting!  Gotta love them!  
There's a classic little tech-development boom happening in this space.
 It's very old-school desktop 1980s.  

 I rather expect to get one of these devices some day soon.    Here in
Belgrade, I just wrapped up and shelved a perfectly functional desktop
computer -- just because it was old, and I don't need it.  With
desktop computers so clunky and obsolete, I've got room for a 3d
printer now.  "I got rid of a computer for Xmas" is the new "I got a
computer for Xmas."  "I got a 3dprinter" is the new hipster
desk-ornamenting knick-knack.

Of course it's not that you own a printer, it's what you print with
it.  That's why I watch open databases like "Thingiverse" with more
interest than the printing devices themselves.

#2.  Koreans.   2012 was all about K-pop and Samsung.  Who can't
admire these two mushrooming efflorescences of Korean soft power and
Korean hard manufacturing?   They're the New 1980s Japan.

#3. Indians. Bollywood has long been a hobbyhorse of mine, but 2012
was the first year in which I formally interviewed a Bollywood star --
for a pricey Swiss magazine, no less.    In 2012, Indian cinema was
making unprecedented amounts of  money.  There's been an unheard-of
stream of Indian box-office smashes, and there are plenty more in the
hopper.  The various Bollywoodians I'm following definitely feel the
wind at their backs.  Some of the younger artistes are getting all
voice-of-a-generation about themselves.

They're not just selling the usual masala movie rubbish, either.  A
player like Aamir Khan here seems to be methodically working his way
into Ronald Reagan territory.  Aamir Khan's all backlit-patriot after
playing heroes in his movies.  Look at the extensive phone and digital
tie-ins here. Pretty snazzy.

http://gigaom.com/cloud/how-indias-favorite-tv-show-uses-data-to-change-the-world/

#4  Turks.  It's easy to appreciate the Turks from the distance of
Belgrade.  Sure, Turks are pretty miserable, but just look at the truly
awful state of everybody else around them!  Syria reduced to bloody
rubble... even the Greeks, the Turkish bete noire, are in anguish.  
The Greeks had most everything the Turks ever wanted from the world,
and the Greeks were reduced to ruin by it.

The Turks can feel pretty pleased about their luck.  The Turks should
knock it off with jailing all those Turkish journalists, but at least
that means people are reading the news in Turkey.   

In 2012, a glossy new Turkish historical soap-opera, "Suleiman the
Magnificent," had women swooning from Moscow to Sarajevo, while Turkish
Airlines is flying all over the region.  It must feel pretty good to
be Turkey now: an Islamic-political NATO power, treated like
responsible grown-ups while the Israelis are sawing off their own feet
in public.

#5.  China.  Yes, they're very big and powerful.  I wish they were
more interesting.  I try, but....  While Turkey seems to have a Moslem
charm offensive going on,  everybody around China is keenly resentful
of their island-snatching behavior.  The only allies the Chinese have
are pariah states who depend on them for loose cash.   If the Chinese
were as diplomatically charming as the Brazilians, they'd have taken
over the world five years ago.  Why are they such boorish hicks?

#6 Tea Party guys.  It's always "the worse, the better" with these
Trotsky-style fanatics.  Every failure, rejection and common-sense
setback galvanizes them to new extremes of faith-based ideological
weirdness.   

As someone who hangs out in Europe, I'm used to bizarre political
movements, but the Tea Party is truly impressively strange by anybody's
standards.   Acidheads have had more coherent thinking than these
Creationist Randite gold-bar-eating pro-coal zillionaire market fundie
people.   They lost the American election, but winning one and
governing a superpower never seemed to be on their agenda.  That hasn't
discouraged them, though.  They've got ladder notches and fallback
positions all the way to the prepper graveyard.

#7 Qataris.  The financiers of Al Jazeera, of the Arab Spring, Egypt,
Libya, Syria, etc etc.  There's only a quarter of a million of these
people, and all their real decisions are probably made by six
aristocrats,  but the effect they have on the world is incredible.  If
the War on Terror had a winner, it's the Qataris.  Nobody ever dares to
say anything mean about them.  Even Israel and the USA are afraid of
them, because the USA and Israel both instinctively kowtow to rich guys
with TV stations.  

#8 Stacks.  In 2012 it made less and less sense to talk about "the
Internet," "the PC business," "telephones," "Silicon Valley," or "the
media," and much more sense to just study Google, Apple, Facebook,
Amazon and Microsoft.  These big five American vertically organized
silos are re-making the world in their image.  

If you're Nokia or HP or a Japanese electronics manufacturer, they
stole all your oxygen.  There will be a whole lot happening among these
five vast entities in 2013.  They never compete head-to-head, but
they're all fascinated by "disruption."

Why these canny subversives have let idiots like the Koch Brothers buy
the American government, I just dunno.  The Stacks could buy the
Republican Party, lock stock and barrel, with their pocket change.
  
## 4 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 26 Dec 12 10:18

    
If I was managing investments for the stacks, I would consider the
American government a bad investment at the moment, especially given
the ideological and conceptual disarray within Congress and the Senate.
We talk about the disruption of various industries by the emerging (or
post-emergent, I suppose) Internet media environment, but the
disruption/destabilization of political frameworks and institutions,
and the impact of that crisis of authority I mentioned, are somehow not
getting the same level of analysis. Lawmakers are deluged with
information like the rest of us but more so, challenged by complex and
contradictory policy tangles worse than the dreadlocks of Cthulhu,
pounded by lobbyists from more or less sinister angles of the left and
right, tempted to wade trickling streams of power feeding into pools of
money, and scrutinized by voters and their surrogates as the
inescapable light of Internet-mediated transparency derails the
protective obfuscations that was so much a part of old-media politics.
Whatever you say, whatever you do, there's a bartender, waitress, or
masseuse nearby with a phone-camera and a YouTube account. American
government is like one of those failing businesses where everyone in
the org chart is too engaged in CYA shuffling to consider, let along
protect, the company's current and future well-being. The Koch Brothers
would do better to buy shares in the stacks, but they're a century
behind in their thinking.
  
## 5 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 26 Dec 12 11:20

    
Well, the Stacks have heaps of cash, and obviously the American
government seems like a bargain to a lot of other people.  Buying it
might be a bad investment, but not buying it could be a lot worse.

If you're running investments for the Stacks, do you really want
Sheldon Adelson on line one for Washington policymakers?  The guy is a
lunatic.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sheldon_Adelson
  
## 6 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 26 Dec 12 11:46

    
I love this, from that Wikipedia article: 

"Originally a Democrat, Adelson became a Republican as his wealth
increased. 'Why is it fair that I should be paying a higher percentage
of taxes than anyone else?' he reportedly argued to an associate."

That short paragraph gets to the source of a conflict that's shaking
the world right now. The Democrat Adelson probably believed that the
wealthy should pay a bigger share of the cost of government because
they can afford it, and because government has facilitated their
opportunity to grow rich. When you're the guy with the big bank
account, you're less inclined to part with accumulated ducats. Two
perspectives on economic justice, both with a rationale. It's a wicked
problem of polarization.

At global scale, it appears that we have more warm bodies than we can
support with available resources, and the population just keeps
growing, and in some locales, living longer. Competition's increasing,
economies are failing, what's the solution? 

I once quoted an environmental scientist in a conversation with Jamais
Cascio. The scientist said the earth's current resources can't support
universally extending a high standard of living, as we have in the
U.S. Jamais said this was a bad assumption, the issue being "... as we
have in the U.S."  Everyone could have a high standard of living by
some more moderate definition, one that doesn't assume a 2000 square
foot home on a half-acre lot in the suburbs.

Everyone could be rich, if rich is defined, not as Sheldon Adelson
would define it, but as someone like Jamais or Bill McKibben might
define it.

Greed, like polarization, is a wicked problem. Jamais' response was
reasonable, but was it practical? Can we eradicate greed? It's deeply
embedded. Even the most enlightened struggle with it (if they say they
don't, they're not enlightened).
  
## 7 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 26 Dec 12 12:24

    
The locals here in Belgrade get unnerved when I say that things are
improving here.  

I'm not gonna argue value-metaphysics, but the streets are in better
condition.  There's a handsome new bridge across the Sava River.  The
shiny high-tech Ada Bridge is on t-shirts and postcards now; it's the
beloved symbol of a new dispensation.

Belgrade store fronts no longer look like grimy ex-Communist depots. 
The local merchants have learned the dark arts of capitalist marketing,
so there are tie-ins, loss leaders, and branding.  Kiosks, which used
to be the survival islands for a stricken populace, are just
street-stalls that sell some convenience goods.  

The forged and counterfeited products -- there used to be every kind
of those, in heaps -- are fading away.  The running shoes are authentic
shoes, the batteries actually work, and the fake DVDs have been
trumped by fast, efficient broadband piracy. 

Belgrade women are wearing Desigual coats these days.  Nobody who is
flaunting the notoriously eccentric Desigual is in any "Transition
Economy."  They're not the women of Vienna, but they're certainly
out-dressing the women of Zagreb, who are doing their level best but
just don't get it with that Belgrade intensity.

The shopkeepers and restauranteurs are attentive and cordial to
customers, even to the Germans and Japanese.  They've internalized that
 social relationship now. Nobody remembers what Communism once was. 
They've forgotten how to do Communism, what it felt like, what it
meant, why it mattered.  Younger people don't know what Yugoslavia was.
 For them, a national border is an annoyance that keeps you away from
your Facebook friends.

There are new bookstores in Belgrade. There seems to be more regional
publishing, too.  It's odd that ink-and-paper media should be a big
local deal, but local TV and radio, which used be very lively, are
almost inert now, mostly because nobody is screaming in anguish.  

Serbs are still exceedingly keen on being more Serbian than thou.  Yet
they're also showing a revived and healthy interest  in the nearby
Turks and Croats.  As a nation, Serbia is a small republic -- but
Belgrade is a metropolitan city.   It cramps people's imaginations to
be stuck inside a tight little Ruritania.   The city's too big for the
nation.

Belgrade has never been Paris, but it's traditionally been a regional
attraction, where Eastern Europe's truly benighted and miserable can
find a pretty good neon-lights party.   Belgrade never did much top-end
champagne, brandy and caviar, but they generally had a good solid
blue-collar line in yogurt, brandy and sausage.  To become a  party
town again, they don't have to outdo Paris.  They only have to outdo
Zagreb, Ljublana and Bucharest.  

I hear some rumors -- and I believe them -- that Greeks are fleeing
the EU and starting businesses in Belgrade.  Turks are investing, too. 
 

When the Radical Party took power in the recent elections, every sane
person chewed their nails to the elbow in fear.  Once in power, the
Radicals did the opposite of what the "Western-oriented market
reformers" wanted them to do.  That's turned out to be a rather popular
set of policies.  They won that first election fair and square, and if
things go on at this rate, the Radikalni are gonna get re-elected.  

The Balkans are, by their nature, a region of turmoil.  One terror
car-bombing or a political assassination could restore the normal
discord in 24 hours.  Plus, climate change is hitting this part of the
planet just like everywhere else; it's the solstice pit of dark
December and I've got my window open -- global warming brought
shirt-sleeve weather for Christmas.  

However, to complain about Belgrade under these conditions is just a
temperamental habit.  The Yugoslav wars are fading into the past with
all due speed; those were some stately, 20th-century, old-fashioned
wars, with their front-lines, TV, and state-controlled radio.  Not a
drone in sight, not one handheld smartphone.  Not even one suicide
bomb.  

Sometimes you've got to take the good wherever you find it.
  
## 8 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 26 Dec 12 17:15

    
Austin, on the other hand, is booming, and then some. We now have
Circuit of the Americas, an advanced 3.4 mile Formula One racing
circuit that's already hosted the U.S. Grand Prix as its inaugural
race. Some Austinites were freaked out at the prospect of huge global
crowds filling the highways, 'copters buzzing overhead, more potential
growth, more potential taxes, etc. The first race went pretty well,
infrastructure was managed effectively; traffic ran smoothly; there
were boisterous, friendly ambient parties and events; Austin glowed
even more brightly on various geographical and concept maps. There were
loud and persistent ka-chings.

You'd never know there were wars, famines, hurricanes, earthquakes,
climate change, fiscal cliffs and global financial mayhem, deranged
serial killers, jackbooted thugs, drug cartels, or other forms of evil
in the world. All concerns set aside for the duration of the Great Race
featuring the highest of high tech automobiles.
  
## 9 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 27 Dec 12 00:54

    
It only makes sense that Austin would have the classed-up, Cosmic
Cowboy version of NASCAR.
  
## 10 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 27 Dec 12 01:08

    
Here's a swell, extensive, grindingly detailed article on the Chinese
"princeling" class and their capitalist clan machinations.

There's an undercurrent in this article about how much trouble these
Stanford-educated, English-speaking technocrats are in, for being so
rich and conspicuously successful in pokey old China.  

And this is published in BLOOMBERG.  Have they ever heard of Mr.
Bloomberg?  Are they entirely devoid of self-awareness?
  
## 11 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 27 Dec 12 01:09

    
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-12-26/immortals-beget-china-capitalism-from-citic-to-godfather-of-golf.html
  
## 12 of 186: Adiministrivia (jonl) Thu 27 Dec 12 06:11

    
The short link for the 2013 State of the World conversation:
http://bit.ly/2013-state-of-the-world

If you're reading this and you're not a member of the WELL, you can
submit commits or questions that hosts from the WELL will dutifully
post here. To do so, click the link at the bottom of the page, where it
says "Non-members: Submit a comment or question."
  
## 13 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 27 Dec 12 07:29

    
I met with a South Asian delegation a couple of weeks ago -
representatives from Afghanistan, Kyrgyz Republic, Nepal, India, Sri
Lanka, and Bangladesh. Their program was called "Strengthening Civil
Society"; my subject was the role of the Internet and digital media. I
realized that, through television and later the Internet, they'd been
exposed to a persistent feed of impressions about the U.S.A. That
persistent media exposure has carried something more than facts -
there's a vibe, a sense beyond knowledge, a kind of charisma. It's not
about political beliefs or economic systems or business acumen. Beyond
that, there's a vitality and a moral tone that resonates deeply. And
there's the fact that we really do have a civil society. Even polarized
as we are today, even with greed and corruption and occasional
psychosis disturbing social and cultural stability, there's still a
general widespread respect for the rule of law, for doing the right
thing. When you fall down in the USA, chances are somebody will come
along and lift you up. It's kind of amazing, when you think of it, this
idea of sustained civility, relative safety, even given the
exceptional crimal breaches and psychotic breaks. I wonder if we're
drawn to fantasies of the zombie apocalypse, where civility is strained
to the point of breaking among the few remaining humans, as a contrast
that reminds us how well our social structures hold together, how
relatively safe we are in our various cubbies and homes, well-fed, warm
when it's cold and cool when it's blindingly hot.
  
## 14 of 186: Ed Ward (captward) Thu 27 Dec 12 07:32

    
Just a minor point here, but I really don't think that "the
government" helped Sheldon Adelson build a gambling empire with
tentacles deep into Macao. At least I hope not.
  
## 15 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 27 Dec 12 08:36

    
I'm sure you're right, but he grew his fortune in the U.S., via
Comdex, and the Sands and the Venetian in Las Vegas. If he'd gone from
Macao penniless, and tried to build an empire from scratch, I don't
suspect he would've got anywhere. 
  
## 16 of 186: Ed Ward (captward) Thu 27 Dec 12 09:55

    
no, he went to Macao *after* all of that. Sorry for the interruption.
  
## 17 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 27 Dec 12 11:03

    
I love those "civil society" guys.  There's a group here in Belgrade
called the "Center for Cultural Decontamination" that's been civilly
decontaminating for, gosh, must be twenty years now.  Things never feel
any less contaminated for them.  One gets the impression that,
although they don't exactly love the contamination, they'd be at a loss
for what to do without it.

There's a kind of "civil society" which is mostly about the soft power
of public opinion on the actions of government, and then there's
something else that I guess one might call "social capital," which is
why people don't just go cut the throat of the neighbor and run off
with his microwave.  It's been my experience that they're not the same
thing, and the one can actually get in the way of the other. 

 The Balkans has always been pretty low on "civil society," because
most political decisions are made in smoke-filled rooms by angry drunk
guys.  But in terms of "social capital" they're quite keen on looking
after one another. The populace is very polite and considerate, by
American standards.  Hold-ups, muggings, drive-bys, gang rapes,
maniacal outbursts by guys with automatic weapons, they're all
practically unheard-of.

The feeling on the streets of Belgrade is vastly calmer and cozier
than, say, Los Angeles.  By the standards of Belgrade, you'd think that
LA was a para-militarized civil war zone, even though LA has got
"civil society" like nobody's business.
  
## 18 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 27 Dec 12 11:11

    
The Italians are second-to-none with the "social capital," which is a
major reason why their government is so dysfunctional.  Italy really
isn't a "nation" with a "government," it's a bunch of extremely
civilized city-states where a nationalist lifestyle was imposed during
the 1860s.  If the local predators in France and Austria hadn't
invented national government, I don't think the Italians would have
ever gotten around to it.

Now we've got social networking entering the mix, and I really wonder.
 It isn't government, or civil society, or social capital... people
adore it, obviously, but you have to wonder what the upshot will be in
the long run.  What will people say about it in 20 years, or 40 years?
  
## 19 of 186: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Thu 27 Dec 12 11:14

    
Welcome, Bruce! I appreciate how you've opened this year's
sotw@well.com.  How about that Psy: Who'd have thought a K-popster
would be the first guy to hit a billion views on YouTube? And if you
add in all the affectionate rip-offs, probably moving in on two
billion. (Loved the MIT homage: "Opa Chomsky style" indeed.)

Gangnam Style's world domination gives me more hope than just any
political event of 2012.

We're over 20 years out from the founding the WELL, which was among
the first generation of what's now being called social networking. Does
that suggest any answers to what people will say about the current
social media, in 20 or 30 years?
  
## 20 of 186: David Gans (tnf) Thu 27 Dec 12 11:17

    
I walk around this world feeling both deeply rooted in the societies I am
part of and hopelessly out of touch with the thousands of cultures that
exists all around me.  All this media, all these social networks, all these
choices.
  
## 21 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 27 Dec 12 11:56

    
<captward>, sorry for the confusing typo. I meant to type "if he'd
gone TO Macao penniless." My point was that Adelson built his fortune
in the U.S. - though I suppose it's arguable whether the U.S.
government helped or hindered. Probably more a matter of infrastructure
than policy.

Back to our regularly-scheduled program... 
  
## 22 of 186: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Thu 27 Dec 12 12:06

    
Seems to me that a major trend worth watching will be the attempts of both 
governments and corporations to control conversation on the internet.  Any 
thoughts, gentlemen?
  
## 23 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 27 Dec 12 12:16

    
<tnf>: I'm not sure we're built to handle that firehose of information
choice. I ran across a Ted talk by Gary Wilson called "The Great Porn
Experiment" and a related website, "Your Brain on Porn"
(http://yourbrainonporn.com/). Wilson talks about the impact of
Internet porn, which is a subset of all the stuff flooding through the
firehose. We've never been able to consumer information like this
before, to be so exposed to so many different signals and perspectives
and lifestreams. Where porn's concerned, we've never been able to
consume so much of so many different blobs of pornographic content, and
he argues that our brains and bodies aren't equipped to handle it,
that there's a resulting addiction, desensitization, depression, and
sexual dysfunction.

I'm still processing this, not thinking so much about the issue of
porn as the broader effects of knowing too much about too many things.
I find myself taking more breaks from the streams of information by and
about my friends, reading more books and fewer activity streams. When
I'm surfing online in hyperdrive mode, I feel an anxiety about all
that's happening and how to track it. Every day I get notices about so
many events that are happening at once, and for every event I make, I
feel I'm missing a dozen others. Is it better not to know?

I suppose I've been information-greedy, and greed is destructive.
  
## 24 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 27 Dec 12 12:47

    
I still don't have a good grasp on history and the great ideas of past
thinkers! Now data is doubling on the NET about every two years
(granted most of it is crap). Beginning to wonder if the 'past' is
going to vanish, or collapse to a ten year horizon, and the impact of
all that. Existentially, we're all surviving in the 'now' and creating
our own futures; really appreciate both your updates on life as it
actually is in both your 'urbs - there's a comforting resiliency there.
But I've always found some comfort and wisdom in looking back to see
how others did it and what they thought about.  
  
## 25 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Thu 27 Dec 12 13:00

    
At SXSW this year a reporter from the Denver Post asked me what I thought
the next big thing would be. I felt kind of foolish when I responded with
'personalization', but the more I think about it, the only hope for dealing
with that information firehose is some better filtering. It's nice to have
subject matter experts like <jonl> and <bruces> around to be human filters,
but I suppose that's what journalists and critics have always been for.

A lot of us globally aware, internet native, early adopter types are hitting
our mid-30's, complete with careers and kids and the responsibility for
leading our family groups for the next generation. We read stuff about the
mind-boggling amount of debt rolling around the financial system, experience
a record breaking weather event every few months, and see places like Greece
take the expressway from excess to austerity in less time than it takes to
age tequila. Our parents generation would have bought bigger houses, put
down roots and settled in for the long haul, but my lizard brain keeps
whispering to stay light and keep the options open.

So what do we do? Do we double down on where we're at, or do we stay
location-light, burrow our roots into the net, and go where the wind takes
us?
  
## 26 of 186: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Thu 27 Dec 12 13:12

    
We're only just at the start of this and the conversation has touched
on politics and power, sense of history and forgetting history,
bridges, fashion, social networks, capitalism, elections, civil
society, facebook, information overload. In the old days of Eastern
Europe, a young playwright influenced by a rock band could write
serious (and funny) plays, philosophically informed political thought
pieces, and end up president of a country; art was subversive, and
mattered; it was a way to cut through censorship and to move a culture.
Now we've got little censorship in the extended West except for the
ways that money can drown out other voices. We've got Gangnam Style,
corporations, on one hand, and on the other, worries about violence,
social structures, and climate change. Is there a place for art at the
table, or is that just so 20th century? 

In China, an artist can still be jailed; presumably, people pay
attention, and that's why he's jailed. Bruce, as a writer of science
fiction, do you think you have the power to move the world's rudder? Do
you think any art does?
  
## 27 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 27 Dec 12 14:05

    
<jh>: Love the idea of art as trim tab.
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trim_tab)
  
## 28 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 27 Dec 12 14:49

    
I'm quite the Vaclav Havel fan, and I re-read some of his work after
his recent death.  I was thinking, "Well, he was a creature of the Cold
War, this is going to seem quite dated now," but I was startled by its
immediacy and relevancy -- not to Communism, but to contemporary
society.

Americans don't have state-supported censorship, but they do have a
civil cold war, and the factions don't talk to one another at all. 
There's no open debate, there's no discourse.  There's a little bit of
room for debate within the factions but between them, there's nothing. 


The Republican Right lives in absolute terror of MainStreamMedia
tyranny.  They consider every anchor of civilization to be under
relentless attack by idlers, moonbats and feminazis.  If you listen to
'em, and I do, they sound like they're being bathed in acid.  Every day
they nail the doors of ideology more tightly shut.  
  
## 29 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 27 Dec 12 14:58

    
I lost a favorite uncle this holiday season.  He was elderly and
frail, and he had a good life -- a remarkably jolly character, really,
the life of many a party -- so it's not a tragic loss, but I find that
the grief touches everything I see.

Grief is a worldview all its own.  Grief gives reality a lunar glow. 
It's healthy to be placed in touch with the tragic side of life, the
losses that make life's value so clear.  It's like winter daylight.

My uncle wouldn't want me to be all upset about his passing, and to
tell the truth I'm not "upset," but I am diminished.  Changes in the
state of the world are marked by absences as well as by novelties.  The
year 2013 will be the first year of my life that does not contain my
uncle.

It'll be different.
  
## 30 of 186: David Gans (tnf) Thu 27 Dec 12 16:43

    
My sympathies, Bruce.

Jane asks a great question.  I think part of the problem for artists thes
days is the fragmentation of the culture/market.  My old friend Peter Case
posted on Facebook a while back that he was starting a label, and my first
thugh was, "Pretty soon it's going to be one man, one label."  He wrote back,
"It's like the fall of the Soviet Union: the playing field is completely
level."

That's both good and bad.  It means Peter and I have better access to the
market by virtue of all the amazing tools available to us for making and
marketing our music, but it also means the ceiling has come down so low that
the ability to make a decent living (let alone a fortune) as a musician is
greatly diminished.

The failure of the "music industry" is a natural result of its venality and
greed, compounded by its failure to recognize, acknowledge, and adapt to the
changes brought on my advancving technology.  There might have been a time in
the '70s when I could have made some money witha  hit record or two, but I
would been much more likely to have ended up in dept to the label and not
even owning the rights to my own work.  So I don't mourn the demise of the
labels.  I earned a mlower-middle-five-figure income from my musical en-
deavors this year, and I think I've done better than a lot of people I know
and respect.

Even a successful recording artist or novelist or poet or whatever is
unlikely to penetrate the culture on the level of a Bob Dylan or Francis Ford
Coppola or John Irving.  There are too many media, too many niches, too many
subcultures, each catered to by its own channels.
  
## 31 of 186: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 27 Dec 12 18:47

    
hi <bruces> --- not a big general telelologically ambitious question but due
to coincientally reading a lot of 90s fiction about sarajavo --- wondered
how it was doing these days, how you think it's faring in the panoply of
cities, etc
  
## 32 of 186: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Thu 27 Dec 12 18:49

    
I'm a fan of two musicians who support themselves by running their own
labels for their own music.

They don't live in SF, Manhattan, or any other expensive place. One
lives in a cheap part of Arizona and the other lives (I think) outside
of Edinborough in a cheap place.

On the other hand, they sell music globally and don't pay a cut to an
agent or a record label.
  
## 33 of 186: David Gans (tnf) Thu 27 Dec 12 19:11

    
Right!  I know quite a few musicians who relocated to places where the cost
of living is manageable.  Access to the Internet and an airport (or an
Interstate Highway) are all they really need.

(PS sorry for not proofreading my post!)
  
## 34 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 27 Dec 12 20:08

    
Two good questions:

Jeff: "Do we double down on where we're at, or do we stay
location-light, burrow our roots into the net, and go where the wind
takes us?"

Jane: "...do you think you have the power to move the world's rudder?
Do you think any art does?"

A relevant data point: there are 7 billion people on the planet;
that's a 7x increase since 1800, and it's doubled since 1970. So it's
not just that we have fragmentation, an exploding number of channels,
etc. We have massive increase in the number of humans, in the number of
voices, the number of artists, musicians, journalists, engineers,
cooks, bottle washers, etc. 

Jeff: I think it's a good time to take root and build - build
sustainably, that is. We can't afford a lifestyle that spends too many
resources, given the inevitable competitive pressure as populations
grow faster than the resources to support 'em.

Jane: I think it was easier for one artist to make a difference when
there were fewer people, and fewer of them making art. And, for that
matter, fewer rudders to nudge.
  
## 35 of 186: Roland Legrand (roland) Thu 27 Dec 12 20:13

    
So in these times aspiring journalists run their own individual media
outlets, musicians their individual labels, authors their own
publishing house etc. It sounds all wonderful and creative, and it is,
but at the same time the pressure on people to succeed, to stay
creative and awesome year after year is relentless. Their loved ones
may pass away or get in distress, it doesn't matter for the market in
which we're all supposed to compete on a very individual level (which
includes even those still working at corporations - they're supposed to
be 'intrapreneurs'). 
Therapists tell me about the increasing damage they see every day,
caused by this increasing pressure to perform. The middle class is
falling apart under the pressure of globalisation, technology and
extreme competition. Should we not take this into account when
discussing phenomena such as the Tea Party or outbreaks of mindless
violence? 
  
## 36 of 186: Brian Dear (brian) Thu 27 Dec 12 20:48

    <scribbled by brian Wed 20 Mar 13 18:19>
  
## 37 of 186: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 27 Dec 12 22:02

    
Any recommendations for Bollywood films?
  
## 38 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 28 Dec 12 00:16

    
Come 2013, I think it's time for people in and around the "music
industry" to stop blaming themselves, and thinking their situation is
somehow special.  Whatever happens to musicians will eventually happen
to everybody.

Nobody was or is really much better at "digital transition" than
musicians were and are.  If you're superb at digitalization, that's no
great solution either. You just have to auto-disrupt and re-invent
yourself over and over and over again.

It's pretty awful to be a musician and have no possibility of health
insurance (as Jaron Lanier keeps pointing out), but you could have been
a Nokia engineer.  You'd have been blindsided even harder and faster,
and you wouldn't even have had the girls and the weed.
  
## 39 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 28 Dec 12 00:29

    
Well @loris , Sarajevo has been around a long time, and it seems to be
making its way in the world, but of all the former-Yugoslav countries,
Bosnia-Herzegovina is definitely the worst.  That area is not a
nation.  It's a frozen conflict. It's been frozen a long time, but it's
never worked like its Dayton creators fondly imagined it would.
  
## 40 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Fri 28 Dec 12 04:01

    
<jonl> and I are both lucky to live in Austin, which lessens the argument to
stay light and move to a better, more connected place. Things are pretty
good here, drought and state government not included. <bruces> notes at the
beginning of the thread about moods brought on by different locales has a
lot of merit, though. I know I feel very different walking the streets of a
new city, soaking the place in through the soles of my feet. Hemingway
wouldn't have been Hemingway if he'd stayed in Chicago, <joi> wouldn't be
able to do what he does if he spent all his time in Boston, and I know my
trips to Mexico gave me a useful insight into how other countries
incorporate the web and social media. The Internet is great for access to
cultural trends, and may wipe away some vestiges of earlier times like Third
Culture Kids, but sometimes it's like reading a food blog versus going to a
restaurant. You're experiencing the thing, but not in the same way.

I agree it would be a selfish use of resources to globe-hop for purely
personal enjoyment. The only way it helps society is if you're giving
something back. While we may not all be journalists or novelists, the ideas
and code we produce are enriched by the places we've been and communities
we've had face time with. Maybe with all the location-specific stuff that's
happening, like charter cities in central America, health care technology in
the Bay Area and concentrated new aesthetic art scenes in London, maybe
there will be great value in having people with skills and insight and
experience who can be mobile and help grow and spread these things.

Maybe that's just naturally what some people do, though, so maybe the
question is moot. If you're inclined to be mobile and go where the fires
are, you'll do that, and the fact that you're that kind of person will
inform the contribution you make.
  
## 41 of 186: Rob Myers (robmyers) Fri 28 Dec 12 06:51

    
> I hear some rumors -- and I believe them -- that Greeks are fleeing
the EU and starting businesses in Belgrade.

That's an interesting historical reversal. I know Serbs who once fled
Belgrade to work in Greece.
  
## 42 of 186: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Fri 28 Dec 12 07:26

    
(<roland> also describes working at a lot of places in the bay area and
why I'm not sorry I left. )
  
## 43 of 186: Paulina Borsook (loris) Fri 28 Dec 12 07:58

    
[more tangent] --- too bad about sarajevo, as my understanding was that it
had always been previous the most cosmopolitan city in the balkan, most like
a world capital. so, sorry to hear. what i have read about it most recently
is that still, all the jobs are with the ngos or the gray/black economy.

but carry on with the big picture talk...
  
## 44 of 186: David Gans (tnf) Fri 28 Dec 12 08:50

    

<34> great post, Jon.  The expanding population puts a strain on everything,
including our compassion.
  
## 45 of 186: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Fri 28 Dec 12 10:03

    
>The middle class is falling apart under the pressure of
globalisation, >technology and extreme competition. Should we not take
this into >account when discussing phenomena such as the Tea Party or
outbreaks >of mindless violence? 

But which middle class are we talking about--the middle class of the
United States, of Europe, or of emerging economies like China?
Honestly, I think what we're seeing in the United States and Europe
should serve as a warning for people in the emerging economies. Control
your financial elites, or they will ruin you. 
  
## 46 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 28 Dec 12 11:28

    
@bslesins, you shouldn't have gotten me started on recommending
Bollywood movies.

It depends on what you want from the experience.  Bollywood flicks are
definitely an acquired taste.  I'm not really a cinema guy myself, so
I watch them like a global media analyst -- "Hey look, this Tollywood
studio has hired a New Zealand production firm!  And they got Amitabh
Bachchan's daughter-in-law to do the female lead!"  Only farangi
Bolly-geeks have that kind of fierce enthusiam.

Most foreign people who want to dabble in Indian movies want to see
something that's all really, truly Indian, so for that purpose, you
can't beat the original Rekha version of "Umrao Jaan" from 1981.  A
great date movie.  It's all about a lovely and sweet-tempered
19th-century Indian girl who is kidnapped and forced into gold-spangled
courtesanship with some really handsome and dashing clients.  The
soundtrack is great, the costumes are awesome, the diva Rekha is in
absolute top form here.  It's one of the great Indian movies about
being Indian.  If you're not somehow moved by this movie, Indian cinema
is not for you.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umrao_Jaan

That being as it may, Umrao Jaan never made a fraction of the cash
from the big-budget India pop rubbish of 2012.  Indian films have never
made this much money, or had this much crowd response, ever.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Bollywood_films_of_2012

"Umrao Jaan" of 1981 is a film that most any film critic would have to
respect for its formal qualities, but scarcely any of these 2012 hits
are much "good."   They're professionally made Indian action films,
comedies, and romances, made with bigger budgets, more lavish
production values and more technical skill than any previous ones.  If
you want a taste of that, go sit through "Dhoom 1, 2, 3," or "Dabangg 1
& 2," or maybe "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" if you like dancing.

"Gangs of Wasseypur" and "Shanghai" are two indie art films where
energetic Indian cinema intellectuals are being very "cinema" and very
"committed."  I'm hugely interested in those new Indian art-cinema
guys, I dig them totally and dote on all their doings.  They're
auteurs, they're not the mainstream; intellectuals like 'em, they're
not a big deal.

Pretty much any Aamir Khan film is gonna be okay.  Anything directed
by Karan Johar is gonna be a well-crafted crowd-pleaser.  Farah Khan is
a female director whose movies are extremely funny if you know enough
about the Bollywood tradition to get her in-jokes.

I'm more interested in the industry itself than I am with the movies
per se.  Thanks to Twitter I'm closer to that Bollyworld than I ever
was.  It's like an allegiance to any other overcrowded soap opera -- if
you get emotionally invested enough in the goings-on, it doesn't much
matter that it isn't actually drama.  It's a soap.  But it's a soap on
an Indo-Global scale.

Oh, and if you like science fiction, watch "Endhiran the Robot." 
Every colleague who watches this Tamil sci-fi movie is mind-blown by
it.  You think I'm kidding here.   Go try it, I dare you.
  
## 47 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 28 Dec 12 11:45

    
I find it disquieting when people want art to make a whole lot of
difference.  When Vaclav Havel went into politics he stopped being an
artist.  He just wrote speeches.  He was an okay president because he
was moral and honest, but as a head of state, Havel was never very
effective.  He never assembled a working coalition of the nation's
power players in his court.  He was an artist, he didn't have a proper
panoply of heavy-duty lieutenants from industry, the military and so
on.

You really want music to change the world?  Okay, the wife of the new
Chinese premier is a career musician.   Peng Liyuan.  She's got plenty
of clout, she's a Red Empress, a dragon lady.  She's a real-deal
musician, she's on TV, she's pretty, she's popular, she can sing. 
She's got the rank of an army general.   She's gonna change your world
a lot.

http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1081646/chinas-peng-liyuan-first-lady-star-power
  
## 48 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 28 Dec 12 17:47

    
In the Mondo 2000 conference here on the WELL, back in the 90s, I
started a topic called "does art transform consciousness." Everybody
had an answer and nobody had an answer. (Okay, that's glib, and I
should admit I don't really remember much about that conversation.)

I see art everywhere. Halfway through our road trip to New Orleans
today, we stopped at the Vermillionville in Lafayette for lunch:
http://www.bayouvermiliondistrict.org/

"The Vermilionville Living History Museum & Folklife Park is an
operating unit within Bayou Vermilion District created to preserve and
represent Acadian, Creole, and Native American cultures within the
region. It provides Lafayette residents and visitors from all over the
world a wonderful opportunity to view a lifestyle as it occured during
a time period spanning from 1765 to 1890. Vermilionville is the largest
physical representation of Acadian and Creole culture in the world.
The park sits on a beautiful tree-covered 23-acre site on the banks of
the Bayou Vermilion in the heart of Lafayette, providing a place for
music, food expression, cultural exchange, historic architecture and
much more."

There was a driving rainstorm, so we didn't get to revisit the park,
but we'd been there before. It's a bunch of older houses with artifacts
from a different time, we've visited others like this; you probably
have, too. Quote from a novel called _The Go-Between_ is relevant here:
"The past is a foreign country: they do things differently there."

Historical artifacts can step us into another culture, and art can
step us into another consciousness, another aesthetic, another lens on
the world. When and whether it changes us is a complex question, we
could probably talk about that and nothing else for the next two weeks.
The answer is probably somewhere between "maybe" and "sometimes." 

Henry Miller said "one has to pass beyond the sphere and influence of
art. Art is only a means to life, to a life more abundant."
  
## 49 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Fri 28 Dec 12 18:30

    
I wonder how long it'll be before they're scanning those historical
artifacts in and printing copies on demand in the gift shop.

Bruce linked to the text of a keynote Aaron Cope gave at the New Zealand
National Digital Forum.  I've been evangelizing it to everyone who will
listen, and in that vein I'll drop a link here.  Read it, it's excellent.

<http://www.aaronland.info/weblog/2012/12/01/coffee-and-wifi/#timepixels>
  
## 50 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Fri 28 Dec 12 18:32

    
Oh snap, and now I see that there's a video of it as well:

<http://webcast.gigtv.com.au/Mediasite/Catalog/catalogs/NDF/?state=oR6Djn2zk8fMsqLA10LF>

(All the way at the bottom.)
  
## 51 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 29 Dec 12 00:37

    
Speaking of art, the past, and its lessons for the future:

In my neighborhood in Turin, there's a bronze statue to a statesman
called "Massimo d'Azeglio."  Massimo happened to be born a rich
Turinese aristocrat, but he always wanted to be a novelist and painter.
 He married the daughter of the most famous novelist in Italy, and his
brother actually managed to become a painter.  

Massimo himself never managed that.  He wrote a few derivative
knock-off novels and he did a lot of weekend painting, but he happened
to be living in a time of national catastrophe and tremendous political
upheaval.  So he enlisted in the cavalry, where he got shot in a
losing battle and never recovered his health.  Then he got called into
politics, where the King made him Prime Minister because he was the
only courtier around who didn't lie and cheat all the time.

Massimo is a great statesman and the father of Italian
Constitutionalism and all that, but I never stroll past his statue, and
in Turin I do that all the time, without a shudder of dread.  That guy
was a born artist who was forced to become important because he was
never left alone to do what he personally wanted to do.  

He put his bohemianism aside, and he became dutiful and responsible. 
He made a big difference: he liberated a suffering people (for the
brief periods before they got stomped again), he forged a new national
consciousness, he signed a lot of budget bills, he sat around a lot of
smoke-filled tables with the rich and the well-born.  The wife never
liked it much.  There seems to have been a lot of trouble over that.

Massimo's got a bronze painter's palette and an open bronze book,
sculpted at the foot of his towering monument -- 'cause his persecutors
knew he was an artist -- but he's never gonna be able to bend down
from his bronze heights of statesmanship and pick them up.  

Given his noblesse oblige, I'm not sure that Massimo was ever allowed
an open choice about being powerful rather than being an artist, but
power is a form of bondage.   No one who needs power and has it, ever
gets enough of it.  Artists like to talk about their work, but powerful
people like to talk about their vacations.   

To think that you can become powerful, and not become like that
personally, is like thinking you can knock back a gallon of Gentleman
Jack and not get drunk because you can write novels and paint.  You can
write and paint, but that's not what it is, that's not what it means. 
  
## 52 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 29 Dec 12 00:42

    
Y'know @jeffk, I was reading that Aaron Strope speech with great
attention...  And it was so prescient, and so lateral, and so crammed
with weird harbingers that I thought, "Man, this must be just like what
it feels like to read one of those Well State of the World
encounters!"

Normally I'm spared the full head-spinning farrago because I'm also
creating it, but in the case of that Strope thing... It's full of the
inchoate ghosts of five years from now.  It's like the guy's speaking
cloud-based Big Data Sanskrit.

And he runs a museum, that's the good part.  If that's what's coming
out of our museums, imagine what the *innovators* are doing.
  
## 53 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 29 Dec 12 02:24

    
Starting your new year by sharing your "pre-loved" possessions.

http://www.shareable.net/blog/9-ways-to-kick-off-a-shareable-2013

There's enough of these share-ability characters around now that
they're almost becoming a visible class of activists.  Maybe this will
be the year when they get a cute, slightly demeaning name for their
emergent way of life, like makers and hackers did.  "The share-arati." 
The "pre-lovables." The "disowners."  Help me out here.
  
## 54 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 29 Dec 12 04:47

    
This piece from Aaron Stope's talk really grabbed me:

"We talk big about playing the long game but we don't, or haven't,
really followed through on that rhetoric when it comes to our
collections and the network.

I always try to think about this in terms of the network and not the
"web". It's hard to imagine the web going away these days but stranger
things have happened, I guess. The network – the internet – is forever.
Assuming that, like me, you think the network is here to stay. If you
don't then none of this is really a big deal. It's a baseline.

The whole point of putting our collections online is so that they will
be there in 50 years. In 100 years. They will still call back when
addressed because that's, I thought, the business we were all in
keeping this stuff.

Ours should not be to pre-vett every possible scenario or use case or
association of our collections along a fixed linear history or if it
is, it shouldn't be at the expense of the future. If that's what we're
doing I will be the bad man and say that we have reduced our cultural
heritage to little more than a monoculture."
  
## 55 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 29 Dec 12 07:28

    
This quote makes me think of the New Aesthetic: "We traffic in things
that we don't necessary know how to collect yet, in part because of
their nature as things devoid of a single narrative motive." Also, re.
Parallel Flickr, "...an exercise to work through the idea of what it
means for an individual to take a more active responsibility in
archiving the digital bits that are left all over the internet."

That Jack Berg quote hits me where I live:  "No one cares what you do
unless you think about it and no one cares what you think unless you do
it."

I love that Aaron gets into the details that we so often gloss. This
made me think of a project I was involved with years ago, when I was
working with technology for a large state agency. We were re-imagining
the database to track eligibility for poverty programs like Food
Stamps, AFDC/TANF, and Medicaid. A contractor was designing a
relational representation that would be the basis for schema design,
and my colleague and I realized at some point that he was including a
lot of data fields for items he was hearing about, but lacked the
experience to evaluate. I.e. he was including data that was not
relevant to the database, but should be stored as documentation only.
Determining what to store and how to store it can be a complex and
difficult can o' worms, and you have to burrow deeply into the problem
before you can solve it. And big data systems touch so many potential
stakeholders who might not be asked for input when they should be... so
I'm guessing we're building many databases that don't exactly work as
they should, not because they were badly designed but because they were
designed on incomplete or irrelevant assumptions.
  
## 56 of 186: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 29 Dec 12 08:48

    
(great "trim tab" metaphor up there, jonl, amplifying in the same way
as the idea it embodies; thank you)

The idea and possibility of art has always been more important than
the lives of those who make it, and perhaps more so than ever now. Art,
design, speculation are how the present is liberated into the future.
The baby Hermes invented the lyre after killing a turtle and stealing
Apollo's cattle. Trickster is art's guardian figure for no trivial
reason--to break the status quo, you need some chutzpah, some priapic
disregard for proprieties, some infantile newness of vision, and a
partly comic predisposition even if what comes out in the end looks
serious.

You mentioned the loss of your uncle, bruces, and spoke about how
grief throws a needed winter light. That we feel these things are
important is unquestionable. That they are outside any direct sense of
utility matters immensely. It also makes it hard to talk about. That's
partly what art partly holds--the realm of the seemingly unuseful which
is somehow also essential. For me, the singularity question should be
"Can a computer feel sad?" Decision-making untempered by emotion--is
that a hell or a heaven or both?

The state of the world... whose world, and what moment of looking... 
one instant I'm watching birds in the berries of the ceanothus right
outside my window, the next I am terrified for my country's future as a
functional society, the next I am reading about Japan's economy, the
next about the dendritic cells of a scientist dying of pancreatic
cancer. Each one of these is unweighable on any scale against the
others. The only one I feel I could possibly affect in any immediate
way is the birds. No wonder that Aaron Stope talks starts with a post
it note with the word "anxious" on it. Our relationship to any sense of
agency is one of the great shifting qualities of human life over
time... we who participate in this conversation have some presumption
of personal agency that feels to me an alteration from that of most
human beings over most of history.
  
## 57 of 186: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sat 29 Dec 12 09:00

    
From an off-WELL reader:



Great to see the yearly discussion underway again.

The year ends with me doing a slow-motion move to my own house on the
other side of my Portland-suburb new-urbanism community. Packing and
moving my own stuff one Honda Civic load at a time has given me the
time and incentive to really cull my stuff. 

The web was around the last time I moved, but since then (2002) we
truly have entered a world with different relations to information. I'm
donating (or selling . . . thank you Powell's) great heaps of books.
And magazines, and clipped articles . . . it seems utterly bizarre,
now, that a clipping file was something once worth keeping. There's a
certain genus of ephemera -- like a manual for wooden pipeline
construction or a 1940 training manual for Navy electricians -- that
I'm not sure what to do with . . . toss them? Scan them? Find a
collector?

The biggest attraction to having my own place: Room for a shop. I
painted the garage to make it a room,  a place to make things, as
opposed to a cave to store shit. I hope making stuff, be it with a 3D
printer or old school tools, continues to be a Thing. The whole notion
of building stuff in cyberspace, be it Second Life or a Minecraft
world, doesn't appeal. 

-
I'm not an connoisseur of Bollywood movies, but I've been trying to
get friends and co-workers to see "3 Idiots," a wonderfully goofy story
about engineering students. 
  
## 58 of 186: David Gans (tnf) Sat 29 Dec 12 09:23

    

Jane talks about something I have some to think of as emotional tectonics:
all these things going on in our lives at the same time that must be dealt
with, each on its own terms.  My professional life consists of several
interlocking gigs, which I am reasonably good at managing.  There is my
personal life, my engagement with the political and cultural world around,
and so on.

This idea hit me a few years ago, when my beloved cat was dying and I was on
tour in Utah and Idaho, driving and crying and doing some critical listening
for my radio show while on my way to play a house concert.  Grieving the cat,
wishing a slow death upon John Boehner, enjoying the hell out of my
performances and the attendant schmoozing - all these powerful thoughts
colliding in my mind.

"It's all so complicated now," as Johnny and the Distractions sang.  Why I
still remember that band and that song after 30 years is another mystery of
the mind.
  
## 59 of 186: From Mediabastard via E-Mail (captward) Sat 29 Dec 12 11:56

    
"The state of the world"...ok

which world?   ok. lets assume we mean "ours" the tech driven, money
counting peoples clicks supreme being one. 
the one about "people" and "communities"..;)
lets ignore the earth,nature, and universe, which just do their own
things and pretty much don't care about us humans or what we do
anyway...

so. the "state of the world"

it's "leveling" for all but .01%.
We're allowing media machines to "level" all "humans" to "media
impressions" as how we relate to each other. Thus the age of "human
rights" for actual individuals is over, and the age of "media rights"
for systems has begun.

Well, began "again"., since its not new and we've been here before--
dark ages, feudal ages, tribal ages etc.

Soon we all will be "equal" property (IP)... grunting sounds we echo
from the internetz to pass the time....and fighting over water and
dumping grounds.

A very few will live in Googedomes... those who like the Emperors new
glasses. And of course the Court Jesters...
  
## 60 of 186: Via E-mail from Maximilian (captward) Sat 29 Dec 12 12:42

    
hi jon & bruce,

again a great and thought provoking wrap-up of currents and
undercurrents in the world! given you touched quite a bit on europe and
the dynamics happening there I wonder what your take on germany is? 

seen by some as a new hegemon - or even as an accidental empire -
germany certainly is in a much different position in 2012 than it was
before say 2008 and the beginning of the financial crisis.
  
## 61 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Sat 29 Dec 12 13:10

    
On another topic, how bout those quantified self folks.  Trim and fit and
shiny and wired up with more sensors than an F1 car.  It used to be
pedometers and wireless connected scales, now they're getting stylish gear
that measures heart rate, persperation and skin temperature constantly.
Pretty soon they'll be getting "You just had a heart attack" push
notifications.

<http://www.mybasis.com/tour/>
  
## 62 of 186: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 29 Dec 12 16:18

    
Belatedly, would like to clarify something I said some posts
back--"The idea and possibility of art has always been more important
than the lives of those who make it..." I meant that from the point of
view of art, not from the point of view of lives. It's easy to read
fast or excerpt and get the wrong impression from a sentence like that,
and I would not want to let that possible misinterpretation sit in the
archives uncorrected.

"Emotional tectonics," gans, yes, you have named it beautifully. We go
through our days so often feeling like slip-strike zones.

It's that old slippery wrestling partner--are we a "self," a "selves",
a system with a set of interesting/sometimes useful delusions, or
something far subtler than any of the above.
  
## 63 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 29 Dec 12 20:36

    
The Quantified Self practices seem rational: it makes sense to monitor
health data and work at optimization, though many won't go there. It
could be even more interesting if we build systems for collective
collection and comparison of metrics. We've seen interesting results
when patients with common conditions form online communities and start
comparing notes and researching together. 

But there's also those who have an intense obsession with the
processes and flaws without our bodily systems, stoked by media and
advertising. In industrial nations, especially the U.S., health issues
abound. We have depressions and bipolar states, cardiac arrythmias and
blocks, surging rates of self-inflicted diabetes, urinary urgency if
not incontinence, viral epidemics and mass vaccinations, roaring
tinnitus, positional vertigo, allergy cycles, headaches, fibromyalgia,
erectile dysfunction, maybe-it’s-alzheimers moments, drawers filled
with antacids, antiflatulence pills, acetaminophen, ibuprofen, aspirin,
loratadine, fexofenadine, diphenhydramine, etc.  Patients fill clinics
and emergency rooms, now spilling over into drug store and grocery
store mini-clinics. Ad channels are filled with pharmaceutical
inducements with rapidly mumbled small-print side effects galore, and
those side effects are creating even more health issues. The healthcare
system is strained, costs are spiraling upward, insurance companies
are cutting benefits... what a mess.
  
## 64 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Sat 29 Dec 12 22:58

    
I'll admit that I had the fitbit pedometer (till it took a bath in the
washing machine)... and the wifi connected scale.  They've certainly made me
attentive to my body's metrics, but looking at the graphs, they haven't
resulted in an improvement.  It's possible that they stopped things from
getting worse, of course.

I saw the CEO of Aetna speak at SXSW and he said that they found about a
third of people respond to metrics and monitoring, a third of people respond
to group encouragement, and a third of people don't respond to either.  His
take away was that just encouraging 'fitness squads' or giving pedometers to
everybody wasn't going to fix the entire problem.
  
## 65 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 30 Dec 12 01:35

    
"The baby Hermes invented the lyre after killing a turtle and stealing
Apollo's cattle. Trickster is art's guardian figure for no trivial
reason--to break the status quo, you need some chutzpah, some priapic
disregard for proprieties, some infantile newness of vision, and a
partly comic predisposition even if what comes out in the end looks
serious."

I'm all for this cool notion of the artist as the mental-liberationist
Greek trickster figure who steals most of his material -- but it's
because I was raised that way. It's a very bohemian approach, very
anti-bourgeois, very grasshopper to the ant.  In some ways this
approach to art limits what you can think and create.  It's a
freeze-dried set of attitudes; when all you've got is the crowbar of
Hermes, everything looks like art-loot.

That's why I enjoy art such as Petar Njegos' epic of early Montenegrin
literature, "The Mountain Wreath." 

http://www.rastko.rs/knjizevnost/umetnicka/njegos/mountain_wreath.html

 Here we've got this very intelligent and determined hillbilly
aristocrat, a poetic priest-warrior gangster chieftain, out of a
half-forgotten province of the Ottoman Empire.  His people are
pre-literate; he's one of the first to read and write his own language.
 

This poem, the "Mountain Wreath," is mostly about tribal patriarchs
flying into a righteous rage and cutting each other's heads off.  It's
very like the Iliad in that way; it's full of noble perorations that
are mostly along the line of, "Rascal, you've done something unbearable
for years now, and I was constrained to get involved in this awful
mess you've created; but this time it's personal. So, prepare yourself:
I'm taking your head, your pistols, your horses and all your women,
and I may even burn your farm."  In the context of this artwork, it's
certainly the right thing to do.  It's the definitive thing to do; it's
how you know you're alive.

Then you compare that artwork -- written by an aristocrat, an
authority figure in deadly moral earnest -- to this kind of
ontological-trickster writing, this kind of "What is Reality, Mr
Njegos," postmodern gendankenexperiment, of which me and my sci-fi
colleagues are so enduringly fond... Well, keen as I am to write that
stuff, it can seem like pretty thin soup.  

There are mountain guys in Pakistan and Afghanistan who think just
like Mr Njegos now.  They're not going away.  They're not even losing
their wars, and they've got the highest birth-rates on Earth.   

If they could read, they'd read this Njegos text and back it a hundred
percent:  "At last, moral advice from the shores of the Mediterranean
with which we entirely concur!"

Brian Aldiss once told me that science fiction was full of guys who
would write about Martians without ever visiting Indonesia.  But
visiting Indonesia is one thing -- if you actually *hang out* within
Indonesia, you *become* Indonesian.  You don't visit it, or steal it,
you are it.

You have to get past the stark fact that Njegos is an Ottoman
Christian-sect hillbilly on horseback who knocks people down with
spiked clubs and cuts their heads off as trophies.  He is, but he's
also a great poet.   Njegos even has a wry sense of humor; it's just
not what Americans would consider "wry" or even "humor."  When you
understand his jokes, when you know they're genuinely funny, that's a
bigger mental yoga-stretch than we're supposed to allow ourselves
within the USA; it makes a "galaxy far far away" look like a Hollywood
backlot in Southern California.  Which is what it is, pretty much.
  
## 66 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 30 Dec 12 01:39

    

I like the "Quantified Self" trend -- I'd certainly like to know more
about what's going on in my own body.  It doesn't seem fair that it's
such an unknown world in there, wilder and lesser-known than the
Amazon.

But I wonder what will happen when this practice mainstreams, and
becomes less of a fringe hobby for numerate Yankee geeks.  It's
alarming to live in a place with disastrously low life-expectancy, like
Belgrade.  The lifespan difference between Serbia and Northern Italy
must be close to 25 years -- especially for men.

These Serbian men who perish in droves of alcohol and cigarettes in
their late 50s, they've got a "quantifier" already -- all they have to
do is look in the mirror.  But telling them that they'd live longer
without those substance-issues is like telling Americans that they'd
live longer without their cars and handguns.  It's perfectly true, but
it's so beside the point of living that it doesn't show up on the
radar.

Maybe if you had *much better radar* -- like you got nagged by your
handheld every morning, because it took your pulse and sniffed your
breath?  People think that if you're told the truth you'll change what
you're doing.  Obviously they've never met a Creationist or a
climate-change denier.  I can imagine a Russian-style Quantified Selfer
where Ivan Sixpack checks himself out and says, "hey, I'm not drunk
enough yet!" and chugs down another one.

"Yeah, my lungs are brown now -- but on me, that looks great!"

And, somewhere in California -- "My Quantified New Age Self."  "My
God, look at the state of my chakras this morning!"
  
## 67 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 30 Dec 12 01:50

    

I am starchily informed by a member of the home team that there were
plenty of drones in the Yugoslav wars of the 1990s.

At least, according to these Russian guys:

http://www.radardaily.com/reports/Unmanned_Aerial_Vehicles_Increase_In_Numbers_999.html

"In this context an analysis of UAV losses during the Yugoslav war
from April to the end of June 1999 is interesting. All in all, the
coalition lost 47 vehicles: 17 by the U.S., 7 by Germany, 5 by France
and 14 by Britain. Four vehicles were traced to no specific sources."

I'd totally digging the "sourceless" drones.  I'm betting sourceless
drones are gonna be a major trend.
  
## 68 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 30 Dec 12 06:47

    
Interestingly, "sourceless drone" can also be a musical reference.

I have a friend whose hobby, building radio-controlled hobbyist
airplanes, has become exponentially cooler now that these devices can
be characterized as drones. He was recently showing me a sophisticated
device he'd built - it was mounted with a camera that could be
controlled via head movements from the ground. He had another device
that was more of a hovercraft with granular controls. It could be
mounted with a ping-pong "bomb" that he could drop wherever. I think
there are many like him who have the technology well in hand and are
looking for suitable applications. "Sousveillance" came up in our
conversation. Imagine anti-drone drones...
  
## 69 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Sun 30 Dec 12 10:00

    
It sounds like there's some deeply weird EU-bending stuff going on in
Catalonia right now.  Of course, there's no mention of it in the US news.
Is it something the rest of the southern Europeans are talking about?
  
## 70 of 186: Ed Ward (captward) Sun 30 Dec 12 10:48

    
I can tell you the French around here are eyeing it nervously, and I'm
sure down by Perpignan they're really watching. It's all very
interesting, especially the comparisons with Scotland. What do you see,
Bruce?
  
## 71 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 30 Dec 12 10:49

    
Some context re Catalonia here:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Politics_of_Catalonia#The_amendment_to_the_Statute_and_current_political_issues
  
## 72 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 30 Dec 12 12:23

    
A sourceless drone that delivered GPS-scrambling "sourceless drones"
might be a force to be reckoned with.

I was stunned to discover in this article that the Chinese Red Army
allegedly has a crack force of 50,000 carrier pigeons.  That's right --
silent, radar transparent, winged, avian Chinese drones!  What do they
know that the West doesn't know?

http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324439804578104933926157320.html

  
## 73 of 186: reminder (satyr) Sun 30 Dec 12 17:30

    <hidden>
  
## 74 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 30 Dec 12 17:40

    <hidden>
  
## 75 of 186: John Payne (satyr) Sun 30 Dec 12 19:03

    
> <28> (bruces) Americans don't have state-supported censorship, but 
> they do have a civil cold war, and the factions don't talk to one 
> another at all.  There's no open debate, there's no discourse.

This was the sad conclusion I came away from the election with.  Sure,
I was glad that Obama had won, but that was tempered by the narrow
margin of victory in the popular vote, an inexplicably narrow margin
if you were to assume that everyone was exposed to the same media as
myself.  Had that been the case, Obama should have won by a landslide!

It's sad, and worrisome, and I don't know what to do about it.
  
## 76 of 186: John Payne (satyr) Sun 30 Dec 12 19:10

    
On a more hopeful note, the field of robotics is (finally) coming into
its own.  See the below-linked article about robotics news from the
last year...

http://robohub.org/robotics-year-in-review-top-10-stories-of-2012/

Oh, and as host of the Augmentation & Robotics conference <augbot.ind>,
I appreciate the mentions of augmented reality in <16>, <29>, and <30>.

Check out the essay in the right column of this, last modified nearly 
a decade ago...

http://www.well.com/user/satyr/755/augbotics.html
  
## 77 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 30 Dec 12 20:28

    
Resilience: I'm in New Orleans, and I was thinking today how laughable
it is that, post-Katrina, some believed this city was done. Everywhere
we go in New Orleans, it's packed, and everybody's spending money hand
over fist. 

We had a chance to tour the city today and see some of the
still-obvious evidence of the flood, especially in the 9th Ward, where
many houses are still boarded and empty. Many others have been
recovered, though. One great project: Musicians' Village
(http://www.nolamusiciansvillage.org/about/), conceived by Harry
Connick, Jr., and Branford Marsalis. Cheerful rows of affordable houses
built by Habitat for Humanity, housing local musicians. 

I was impressed by how few of the people I'm seeing in the streets
here have their noses buried in electronic devices, though they carry
them and occasionally consult them. There's just too much life on the
streets, boredom's unlikely if not impossible.
  
## 78 of 186: Gary Gach (ggg) Sun 30 Dec 12 20:30

    
<slippage>
&, taking stock of the world that seemingly didn't end in 2012, might
anyone find bearings on the current American experiment called economy?
  
## 79 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 31 Dec 12 02:40

    

On the subject of this Catalonian secession movement, I'm not intimate
with the many details, but I do have some thoughts on the matter.

I get it about the national aspirations of submerged minorities. 
Generally speaking, Americans have been in favor of nations breaking
free from other people's Evil Empires.  It's very Woodrow Wilson:  let
them speak their minds, let them have a vote, let a free people stand
alone and chastely independent, etc...  

Of course, that's kind of easy for Americans to say, as by European
standards the USA is scarcely a "nation" at all. The USA is more like
some johnny-come-lately empire of multiethnic emigres who are unified
by ideology, law and the dollar rather than by a European-style
national identity.

So I sympathize, and can understand why the Catalans would want to be
more Catalan.  It's a great area, beautiful, thriving (not now, but
most of the time), super architecture, awesome furniture, the food's
great and the women are good-looking, it's been a nation before, etc
etc; they've got as much right and reason to be a nation as most
anybody else.

 However, as somebody who's spent a lot of time in a region where such
a devolution was actually carried out in real life, I need to warn
Catalans about a few consequences of such a victory.

First, you're never going to unite all the ethnic Catalans on some
definite patch of ground.   You're sure to create new minorities who
share your ethnicity outside whatever patch you successfully claim. 
These abandoned guys are going to be a lot of trouble for you.  There's
also going to plenty of woe from multi-ethnic families, families newly
divided by new borders, and so on.

Also, you'll have new non-Catalan national minorities inside your own
area.  Naturally you think you're going to be really nice to them, much
nicer than they were to you when they were the majority, and ruling
over you.  That isn't true.  In a national secession, the
sweet-tempered, nice guys are not going to win.  Otherwise they would
have already been nice and sensible in the statehouse in Madrid.

Your former fellow-citizens are suddenly going to become foreigners. 
Places that you used to visit casually, properties you own, will become
alien territory.  Towns and cities on the new national borders will be
economically strangled.  Long-established businesses will pull out or
shrink in size.  Expect property courts clogged for decades.

Even though you're finally getting your own way politically, you're
going to be a small country with a small ruling class.  You're just not
going to have the manpower to behave like a major power -- like Spain
for instance -- and the long-term debilitating effects of this are
wicked.  Who will man your new embassies?  What about your health
system, transportation network, your military?  What happens when
you're trying to arrange a simple business deal with Norway or
Nicaragua?  Nobody answers the phone.  Your political parties are going
to be county-sized cliques of a few dozen ward-heelers.  Your pundits
will all know each other personally and all meet in the same cafe.

As soon as you're a nation, you'll have a new "national language." 
You'll have to change all the names on the street-sign, the school
textbooks, re-write and republish the ancient classics, harass guys who
blog without the proper spelling, insist that the EU translate all
previous documents into your lingo, and so forth.  You will never
complete this orthographic reform work.  It's impossible.  The more
energy you waste on it, the more you're going to look like  chintzy,
niggling fanatics.

Imagine your relationship with your fellow citizens in the brand-new
Basque Republic, who are naturally going to follow your example as soon
as they can.  Are these guys gonna become your best pals?  Will you
respect them and tenderly look after their fraternal interests?  Or are
you going to consider them a bunch of insular weirdo hillbillies? 
Well, that's exactly how they're going to think about you.  In fact,
the whole world will think that about you.  And them, too.

You imagine that Brussels and the EU are going to look after your
national interests.  Have you ever talked to a small European EU state
about how this works out in practice?  Like Slovenia, for instance. 
You're about to become Slovenia.  Do you take Slovenia really
seriously?  Do you think they matter a lot, do you ever ask their
advice on big problems?  Should they get lots more money?  Are you keen
to give them some? 

Let's imagine you have some military problem, like say, a bunch of
Catalan tourists  get kidnapped by Colombian drug gangs.  Do you plan
to send in your own SWAT team?  Who do you plan to ask for help in
these matters?  It's not going to be Madrid or Brussels.  You might
need to ask the Americans.  Do you know what the Yankees are going to
say to you? Oh, they'll shoot them dead for you, all right, but before
that and after that, they'll say: "What's in it for us?"  They always
say that.

Barcelona is a cool tourist town.  Have you ever seen what happened to
Venice, which also used to be a cool tourist town?  How many people in
your tiny, newfangled government do rich guys have to bribe to just
buy all of Barcelona?  Mexicans, Venezuelans... there are some pretty
rich oil guys in those countries, quite keen on their Spanish heritage,
only you're not Spain, you're much smaller and prettier.  Are you sure
you've got enough clout and smarts to avoid just being picked up and
put in their pocket?

And, last of all, there's something morally repulsive about rich areas
of a country wanting to secede from the poorer areas.   You've got
plenty of company in that regard: the Italian Northern League, for
instance.  Do you Barcelona lefties like the Lega Nord? You trust them
as political allies, you think they're your kind of European movement?

Your economic scheme is basically Mitt Romney talking.  It's all about
freeing yourself from that shiftless 47% of the lazy drifters and the
ethnic dross.  I'm sure we can all admire you for being rich, but are
we supposed to admire you for that attitude?  Do you love your new
gated community that much?  What is going to happen to you, when you
blow a tire on your station wagon somewhere out in Cricket-Chirping
Land?  Are those strangers gonna be your friends out there, in that
world you abandoned to beggary?  Did you pack your prepper arsenal?

I'm not saying you can't or shouldn't secede and form a new nation. 
It's not a new story or a new aspiration.   If the euro collapses and
the EU comes apart, anything's possible.  We'll be looking at a
Depression Europe of the kind nobody's seen since the 1930s. So: do you
remember those 1930s?  The Spanish Civil War?  Did the good guys win
during that business, a hundred years ago?  Were the aspirations of
Catalonia crowned with victory in the 1930s?  What exactly do you think
has changed in your peninsula since then?  

Have you thought that all through?
  
## 80 of 186: Via E-mail from Rui Carmo (captward) Mon 31 Dec 12 04:21

    
Living in Portugal and watching the middle class slowly dissembling,
impoverishing or fleeing (especially the qualified workers), I find it
awkward to read about Central and Eastern Europe with optimism. We seem
to be by and large slowly subsiding into cultural irrelevance, and I
wonder how (if ever) we'll bootstrap creative thinking to get out of
this mess.

Case in point: <http://the.taoofmac.com/space/blog/2012/08/24/2240>
  
## 81 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 31 Dec 12 06:49

    
Again, resilience: the question is how much the system in question can
be changed before it's no longer able to recover. New Orleans, slammed
by Katrina, had so much that was unchanged and recoverable, that
recovery was imminent despite predictions (or at least concerns) at the
time.

The resilience of the human species is suggested by the 7X population
growth over two centuries... and the 2X population growth over four
decades. However that same population growth, if sustained, might prove
to be a systemic change from which recovery is difficult, if not
(ultimately) impossible.

Political leaders respond to 21st century scenarios with 20th century
thinking; that's not helpful. Substantial innovation in technology is
unmatched by political innovation. Political innovation will depend on
individual and social rethinking, and adjustment that diminishes our
attachment to so much that is inarguably unreal.

We have to be mindful. I'm not talking about being mindful of anything
in particular - mindfulness is a practice, the state of being present
and seeing the world as it is right now. The past is gone and
persistently misremembered. The future doesn't exist. Our deepest
neuroses are fueled by attachment to imperfect memory and speculation.
Clearly we depend on memory and speculative thinking to live in the
world, but amplification of and attachment to our memories and our
fears are a misuse of the equipment, voiding the warranty.
  
## 82 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 31 Dec 12 07:14

    
The year 2012 in Korean pop music.  I suppose I should qualify that
and say "South Korean pop music."

http://www.markjamesrussell.com/2012/12/31/the-year-in-korean-music/
  
## 83 of 186: By E-Mail from Julian Bond (captward) Mon 31 Dec 12 08:45

    
Longer and IMHO more complete article about K-Pop in The Quietus.
<http://thequietus.com/articles/11001-psy-gangnam-style-k-pop>

Really funny to see AKB48 recapitulating Sterling's Zeitgeist and
Gibson's Idoru. I wonder, is Yasushi Akimoto enjoying playing his part
as Leggy Starlitz and is he consciously stealing ideas from the books?
Is this Anthropophagy, Neophagy or Retrophagy? (to coin some fairly
horrible neologisms!) 

Meanwhile, I'm waiting for C-Pop, M-Pop and I-Pop (China, Malaysia,
Indonesia, natch) to become a global thing, not to mention Khazakhstan.

Maybe one day, the EU will become a country or some kind of federated
republic states of Europe and it will become possible for regional
sub-divisions like Basqueland, Catalonia or the Scottish Lowlands to
have autonomous self rule within the federated EU and apart from their
current countries. But that feels further away now than it did even a
year ago. First we probably have to deal with the  pressure of the next
set of recruits. Does the EU still have the stomach for Turkey, never
mind places like Lebanon or Tunisia?
  
## 84 of 186: John Payne (satyr) Mon 31 Dec 12 09:04

    
> <81> (jonl) However that same population growth, if sustained,
> might prove to be a systemic change from which recovery is difficult,
> if not (ultimately) impossible.

> <65> (bruces)There are mountain guys in Pakistan and Afghanistan who
> think just like Mr Njegos now.  They're not going away.  They're not
> even losing their wars, and they've got the highest birth-rates on
> Earth.

If population growth were evenly distributed, that would be cause for
concern in that an increase in the population of the developed nations
places a disproportionate pressure on resources.

On the other hand, being as unevenly distributed as it is, we risk
a future in which belief systems which would not otherwise stand a
chance of dominance win through fecundity.
  
## 85 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 31 Dec 12 09:25

    
Places to look for stuff you might want to 3dprint.


Thingiverse: http://www.thingiverse.com
3Dpartsource: http://www.3dpartsource.com/search
Turbosquid: http://www.turbosquid.com/3d
Grabcad: http://grabcad.com/library
3Dvia: http://www.3dvia.com/search/
  
## 86 of 186: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Mon 31 Dec 12 09:30

    
There is a mess of legal stuff going on with Thingiverse that I don't
really understand so I've been not posting stuff there.

However, there's also a lot of people posting objects/models
to github and sourceforge, and shapeways is a nice commercial site for
distributing your designs to people who don't have a personal 3d
printer.

(I can go on far too long about home-based 3d printing, but not in
this thread.)
  
## 87 of 186: By E-Mail from Roger Weeks (captward) Mon 31 Dec 12 13:23

    
<81> "The past is gone and persistently misremembered. The future
doesn't exist. Our deepest neuroses are fueled by attachment to
imperfect memory and speculation. Clearly we depend on memory and
speculative thinking to live in the world, but amplification of and
attachment to our memories and our fears are a misuse of the equipment,
voiding the warranty."

I would suggest that everyone read a talk given by Warren Ellis
earlier this year at the Improving Reality conference. It's very
pertinent to a number of things in this discussion, and as always,
Bruce and Jon, thank you for this.

<http://www.warrenellis.com/?p=14314>
  
## 88 of 186: Roland Legrand (roland) Mon 31 Dec 12 17:09

    
Another example of European regionalism is my country Belgium (small
country, but rather core in the Union, Brussels being the HQ of the
Commission, of NATO...). For some reason financial markets are pretty
satisfied with our politics. However, everybody in Belgium knows that
2014 will be the mother of all elections, the flemish-nationalist party
N-VA is tremendously popular in Flanders - the discourse is similar to
that of Catalan regionalists. 

The issue is that social realities evolve much slower than
technological ones. In Sweden there are still regional tensions related
to old industrial regions which feel discriminated vs. the merchant
regions - an old history which still has huge political implications.
In Belgium there's a similar story of a rich industrial region
(Wallonia) which got hit by a structural downturn in the coalmine and
steel-industries and which turned politically leftist while the former
poor region of Flanders turned more right-wing because of the
importance of small family companies, important harbors and
concentrations of the chemical industry. 

These developments often take tens of years or rather a century to
work through the political and cultural dimensions of a society. My
feeling is that we'll end up with huge groups in society moving too
slowly to catch up with tech and structural changes, and a kind of
super class of cosmopolitan people disconnecting themselves from
regional loyalties. 
  
## 89 of 186: John Payne (satyr) Mon 31 Dec 12 22:54

    
I was about to ask whether Flemish is a Celtic dialect, like Breton 
in Brittany, but thought better of it and consulted Wikipedia, which
states that Flemish is actually Dutch.

Now, my question is how long has it been since it wouldn't have seemed
gauche to simply ask the question, rather than look it up, and what
impact has this application of the RTFM meme to online resources had
upon the art, quality, and content of conversation, online or otherwise.
  
## 90 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 13 01:17

    
In 2012, Oscar Niemeyer the architect died at 104, while Rita
Levi-Montalcini the scientist, a Nobelist chick so entirely with-it
that she was a cover girl for WIRED ITALIA, has died at 103.  When
we'll see the first famous super-centenarian, a celebrity who lives
past 110?

The author Ernst Juenger lived to be 102 -- a German veteran of World
War I, later seen dropping LSD in a psychedelic caftan, and at that
point ol' Ernst was just cruising along -- he started a new magazine at
80, and lived to see Germany re-unified.

The world's currently oldest person, 115-year-old Jiroemon Kimura, is
the oldest male human being in history.   He lives in Japan, where he's
being looked after by his grandson's widow.

I envy this profound ability to time-travel into a distant and quite
alien future, at the placid rate of one second per second.   It's not
so much the mundane pleasure of not dying that I admire, as it is the
breadth of the historical experience.

Meanwhile, work continues on that ten-thousand-year clock.

http://longnow.org/clock/
  
## 91 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 13 01:29

    

In a rare episode of random Belgrade street-violence, it seems that
half a dozen people were stabbed in Belgrade's most popular square
during New Years' celebration.  None are dead but three are badly off. 
Good thing that this lunatic, who is still at large, apparently lacked
an automatic weapon.

The wife and I might have been there in Republic Square, if we hadn't
decided, in our ivied, contemplative, literary fashion, to venture up
into the mountains rather than partying.  Things couldn't be prettier
and more peaceful up here in the snow-covered forest.  Of such
disjunctures of fate is a human life made.
  
## 92 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 13 01:42

    
"Longplayer" has been playing for 13 years.

http://longplayer.org/
  
## 93 of 186: By E-Mail from David Dodd (captward) Tue 1 Jan 13 02:56

    
<roland> "My feeling is that we'll end up with huge groups in society
moving too slowly to catch up with tech and structural changes, and a
kind of
super class of cosmopolitan people disconnecting themselves from
regional loyalties."

I moved from the NYC area to a small city in Wisconsin a couple of
years ago, and while the difference in economic opportunity is
dramatic, it's not the result of differences in access to technology.
The jobs in Wisconsin rely just as much on cutting edge information
tech as those in the big cities, but they're just less desirable jobs.
Call centers, logistics services, contract business services. Move the
jobs that you don't want to pay as much for to the more economically
marginalized areas.

The Market (or Business or Capital or whatever you want to call the
trade aspect of production) uses technology to extract profit from
variations created by social disparity. In that sense technological
development can become a conservative social force. In the US, the
one-party politics developed to institute Jim Crow oppression of Blacks
has moved smoothly to promote the anti-union, anti-tax, and
anti-regulation policies that appeal to non-racist global corporations.
Rather than the South becoming like the rest of the nation, we've seen
policies and tactics developed in the South spread north to states
like Wisconsin and Michigan, in the name of modern economic
development.

So it seems more like the changes in technological realities and
changes in social realities are moving on different tracks. In the US,
the changes in technology spread pretty evenly because of educational
infrastructure and well-developed markets and so forth. But there are
still plenty of formal and informal limits on how easily any person can
get themselves into a position to derive the best economic benefit
from their ability to use the tech. Ethnicity, regionalism,
nationality, and religion are just some of the social tools that groups
have used to create and preserve disparities in economic opportunity,
for thousands of years. They will continue to be salient unless they
are actually replaced by social institutions expressly designed to
spread economic opportunity more evenly.

Obviously egalitarian social institutions will be most effective using
cutting edge technology. But Christianity did significant damage to
the social order of the Roman Empire, just using papyrus manuscripts
and institutions of communal dining. The Christianity parallel presents
another interesting element, in that the Christians actually practiced
ideas of equality and cosmopolitanism that a well-educated Stoic like
Seneca would pay lip service to, but they had plenty of beliefs and
practices that would have kept said Stoic from letting any Christians
into his house. What if the strongest force for more economically
egalitarian and geographically open social arrangements ends up being
Nigerian Pentacostal exorcists, leaving idealistic technophiles of the
cities of the US, Europe, and Japan looking like a bunch of elitist
philosophers?
  
## 94 of 186: By E-Mail from Cole (captward) Tue 1 Jan 13 02:58

    
To Bruce Sterling: How will India and Bollywood respond to the 
gang-rape/murder and current protests?
What is your take?
  
## 95 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 1 Jan 13 08:39

    
We walked down Bourbon Street in New Orleans last night, if you can
call it walking. It was more like swimming through a human stream,
filled with chaotic eddies and vortices. High volume controlled
insanity; pretty wonderful, actually, My brother commented later that
it would've been a far different experience "if the crowd wasn't
happy." Indeed. But the crowd was elated and, on average, quite drunk
on microbrews and hurricanes. It was diverse; you couldn't image where
they all came from. At the dropping of the fleur de lis, one of the
voices onstage asked who all was having their first New Years' Eve in
New Orleans, and there was a huge roar. I suspect the locals not
working the French Quarter stayed home.

I'm always amazed to see civil gatherings of such intensity - amazed
at the level of friendly cooperation - no evidence anywhere of anger or
hostility.

Our theoretical and conceptual interpretations of the world - various
screeds about the political and economic realities and what it all
might mean - seem shallow and empty compared to the complex mess we
have before us. But we have these moments of grace, where anonymous and
autonomous people come together in crowds and beam at each other, help
each other along.

Someone was talking about the economics of south bleeding into the
larger body politic. There's something to that - so much of the
economics and the politics of the U.S. is about getting work done and
distributing resources, who does and should benefit at what level.
Slavery was about free labor, and the labor movement was about making
labor more expensive, so there's a connection between business/labor
and the business/slavery. I'm not an economist but I don't think it's
hard to understand why businesses want to keep labor costs as low as
possible, which creates all sorts of sociopolitical issues and
opportunities for exploitation. This is why I'm exploring the
possibility of an economy based on a proliferation of worker-owned
cooperatives, which I think can be more fair and more resilient.
  
## 96 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 13 09:46

    
The worst Hindi films of 2012.

http://rajasen.com/2013/01/01/the-worst-hindi-films-of-2012/

The Bollywood community is very upset indeed about the ghastly
rape-murder scandal, especially since it's apparent that the dead woman
and her male companion were innocently coming back from a movie when
they were tortured in a bus and thrown on the side of the road.

This was a particularly brutal crime, but the six men who committed it
are all in police custody, and I rather imagine they are doomed. 
There's a great deal of "we must never forget" sentiment in India right
now, but people in Bollywood are pop stars; of course they will
forget.  

Maybe some of the young people in the protests won't forget; they'll
forget that crime in particular because there will be others, but maybe
they won't forget meeting each other.  They are learning who the
problem is, too, because there are plenty of scaly crocodiles in the
Indian establishment who really don't much care that female college
students sometimes get killed inside slum buses.  It can be a little
hard to get sentimental about a medical student when your core
demographic of voters are Untouchables.

It can be motivating when somebody in power casually alerts you to the
political fact that your own life is cheap.  "But wait!  My life isn't
cheap!  My life is sacred!"  "Sorry, girlie, but this is India. 
You're an Indian woman and your life is, in fact, pretty cheap.  Be
glad you're not Afghani."  "Why, how dare you!  You shouldn't even be a
Congressman."  "They all say that.  Come back with some voters, or
else just move along."

That's the story as it stands at the moment.  It really is a lot like
watching the furor over American gun crimes.
  
## 97 of 186: By E-Mail From Tenaya Wright (captward) Tue 1 Jan 13 14:11

    
Bruce Sterling, looking back at your year 2000 conversation (Item
number 61 in the forum list at http://www.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/ ) 
-- this quote came up:

  There will probably be Big Corporations 
  selling Big Wind and Big Solar
  sometime soon.  Shell and BP-Amoco 
  probably in the foremost among them,
  because they see themselves as 
  energy companies, not oil companies.
  If there are thousands of wind-derricks 
  offshore in the the North Sea. it'll 
  be big business like other kinds of 
  big business; sweetheart deals,
  subsidies, dumping, white-collar crime, 
  substandard materials, embezzlement,
  stock-jobbing, whatever.  The advantage 
  is that they won't be selling
  poison.

All that doesn't seem to be happening fast. (There seems to be a
company in California that pays to put solar cells on your house then
sells the power to you at a better rate than the utility would pay, but
that's one of the few business innovations we've seen around this.   

How has your sense of the future (energy future and other stuff too)
gotten changed from back then?
  
## 98 of 186: By E-mail From Justin Pickard (captward) Tue 1 Jan 13 15:56

    
Following on from John Payne's comments in <76>, are the robots coming
for our jobs? Is a certain amount of unemployment going to end up as
part of the system and, if so, what happens next?
  
## 99 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 13 01:23

    
Well, back in 2000, nobody had invented "fracking."  Also, it was hard
to get it that the Chinese would underprice everybody on solar -- so
drastically that the domestic solar industries collapsed.

If, in 2000, I'd managed to speculate accurately about the upshot of
the Iraq War, the failure of Kyoto and the Finance Crisis, people would
have thought I had a death-wish.  We're in a worst-case scenario
situation with climate, by the standards of 2000.  But we're in a Peak
Oil best-case scenario: fracking, the technical miracle cure that every
oil-doomster scorned.

I think what you're seeing from me there is an example of the kind of
"futurism" that Jamais Cascio complains about in this essay:

http://www.openthefuture.com/2012/01/the_future_isnt_what_it_used_t.html

In other words, that is narrowly focussed techie-talk that's trying to
handicap some of the big industrial players in a race of tech
development.  It has nothing much to say about the giant aspects of
modernity that a historian might tackle in the humanities department
some day.

As Jamais puts it:

" ... while those of us in the futures world have been talking about
nanotechnology, fast mobile networks, bioengineering and such over the
past decade, very few of us even came close to imagining back in the
late 1990s/early 2000s that by the early 2010s we'd see:

"The effective collapse of American hegemony.
"The inability/unwillingness of world leaders to respond to global
warming.
"The death spiral of the European Union.
"Accelerating economic inequality.
"Major changes to global demographics, especially population
forecasts.
"The unregulated expansion of financial instruments based on little
more than betting on other financial instruments.
"That the Koreas would remain divided.
"That there hasn't been a major biological, radiological, or nuclear
terror event.
"The speed of urbanization, especially in the developing world.
"The Arab Spring, Occupy, Tea Party, and similar bottom-up political
movements.
"And on and on. If futurists have become almost too good at
technological foresight, we remain woefully primitive in our abilities
to examine and forecast changes to cultural, political, and social
dynamics."

*We futurists are still pretty good at jumping the gun there, because
American hegemony hasn't collapsed yet, and Europe isn't in any death
spiral.

*Also, if we ever get around to taxing carbon, I'm betting that my
remarks up there will still be rather prescient, merely premature:

"It'll  be big business like other kinds of big business; sweetheart
deals, subsidies, dumping, white-collar crime, substandard materials,
embezzlement, stock-jobbing, whatever.  The advantage is that they
won't be selling poison."

*It'll be much worse big business than it might have been, because we
wasted a decade damaging the middle class and wrecking every ecosystem
from pole to pole, but a clean energy business will still be a big,
relatively cleaner, energy business.  It will not be a mindful reform
carried out through acts of enlightened conscience by green communards
in geodomes with personal energy decks.
  
## 100 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 2 Jan 13 05:52

    
That post reminds me of "The Gernsback Continuum"
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Gernsback_Continuum,
http://lib.ru/GIBSON/r_contin.txt):

"During his assignment to photograph 1930s era futuristic
architecture, Parker begins to realize a "continuum," an alternative
reality containing the possible future of the world represented by the
architecture he is photographing – a future that could have been, but
was not, thereby contrasting modernism to postmodern reality. Parker's
glimpses of this fantastical utopian future, characterised by massive
multi-lane highways, giant zeppelins and Aryan inhabitants become
increasingly frequent and disturbing until, on the advice of a friend,
he immerses himself deliberately in the grittiest 'realities' of our
world (such as pornography and news stories about crime and war) that
are at odds with the idealised world of Gernsback and others. Slowly
the images fade to insubstantiality and the story ends with Parker able
to ignore the sight of a nearly transparent flying wing. Parker
realizes that he would rather live in a world characterized by
pornography, crime, and random events than that of the Gernsback
continuum."
  
## 101 of 186: Jamais Cascio via E-mail (captward) Wed 2 Jan 13 09:06

    
"*We futurists are still pretty good at jumping the gun there, because
American hegemony hasn't collapsed yet, and Europe isn't in any death
spiral."

Well, in my own defense, I did say *effectively* collapsed. And note
that this doesn't mean there's a new hegemon (like China) -- the set of
circumstances in which the US is able to push other countries around
is dwindling even without a new superpower in sight. (No defense on the
Europe thing; the EU hasn't turned around completely, but it's in far
better shape than expected.)

The future will always be more messy than we imagine.
  
## 102 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 13 10:30

    
Jamais, I don't think American hegemony has even "effectively
collapsed."  If the Chinese keep pushing everybody around over those
islands, "American hegemony" is gonna be propped up by everybody,
because hey, at least the Americans invade actual working oilfields,
instead of imaginary oilfields around lousy little rocks in the ocean.

That said, it's a good essay, though.  I often think about it, and
maybe the futurist trade will find some way to pull its socks up.
  
## 103 of 186: Brian Dear (brian) Wed 2 Jan 13 10:32

    <scribbled by brian Wed 20 Mar 13 18:19>
  
## 104 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 13 10:43

    
"Following on from John Payne's comments in <76>, are the robots
coming for our jobs? Is a certain amount of unemployment going to end
up as part of the system and, if so, what happens next?"

*It's so interesting to see this perennial question coming into vogue
once again.  When I was a pre-teen first discovering "science fiction,"
that automation dystopia story was all over the place.  Even on the
cover of TIME magazine.  See this Artzybasheff computer  monster, all
busy stealing guy's jobs?  Looks oddly familiar, doesn't it?

http://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/8241732965/

Of course that issue pre-dates me by a long chalk.  It's also the folk
song of John Henry the Steel-Drivin' Man, who breaks his heart
defeating the boss's Steam Hammer.

I can tell you what's NOT gonna happen with "robots."  Nobody's gonna
defeat the logic of the assembly line by starting a Pre-Raphaelite Arts
and Crafts commune where people shun the Robot and make hand-made wall
tapestries.  That's been tried  eight thousand different times and
places.  It never works for anybody who's not Amish.

Framing the issue as "robots coming for our jobs" is rather a moot
point anyhow, because the blue-collar guys who "own" assembly "jobs"
have zero input on whether robots get deployed or not.  What practical
difference does that question make?  No modern salaried employee
anywhere has the clout to defend a "job" from "the robots."   The
investors deploying the robots are serenely unworried about Luddite
saboteurs or crippling labor-union strikes.  Those possibilities of
working-class resistance were de-fanged ages ago.  

So, you know, either they automate some processes at the cost of human
labor, or they don't.  Somebody's alway gonna try it, and in some
areas it works out rather better than it does in others, but the basic
robot story isn't robots, it's "whatever happens to musicians will
eventually happen to everybody."

Apparently this latest little robot-vs-job flap gets most of its
impetus from two things, a cool new assembly robot created by Rodney
Brooks and a typically Emersonian intervention from Kevin Kelly.

So, here I'll tell my Rodney Brooks story.  I met the guy once, at
some forgettable event in Washington DC, and after the panels were
over, Prof Brooks and I ventured into the bar.

So, I was nursing a whiskey sour, and I was like: "So, Doctor Brooks,
I know a little about your work, and --"

"Call me Rod!"

"So, Rod -- level with me about this MIT scheme you have to automate
the movement of insect legs.  How's that supposed to work, exactly?"

So, Rod was nothing loath, and he was pretty well going at it hammer
and tongs, while I was asking the occasional provocative sci-fi style
question -- stuff like "so, how does the cube-square law work out when
the robo-insects are walking on the ceiling?" -- because we sci-fi
writers dote on MIT.  

Then I happened to glance across the bar, and I saw that our bartender
was "frozen in disbelief."  He was so amazed by what Brooks was saying
that his glass and his cleaning cloth were rigid in his unmoving arms.
 This bartender had the affect of a sci-fi movie android with a power
failure. It was the only time I've ever seen that figure of speech as a
genuine aspect of human behavior.

So, I give Rodney Brooks a lot of credit, he's a fascinating guy, I'm
glad to see him kept busy on things other than, for instance, an
MIT-style Vannevar Bush Manhattan Project at an undisclosed desert
location.  I'm confident that Rod's new manipulator is pretty snazzy.  

But let me ask this: if an assembly-line device is going to "take our
jobs," wouldn't a 3dprinter also "take our jobs?"  Why do we treat them
so differently?   I mean, they're both basically the same device:
automated mechanical systems precisely moving loads in three dimensions
by following software instructions.  

So how come the Brooks robot is framed as a sinister job-stealing
robot, while a 3dprinter is framed as a printer, like, a cool nifty
peripheral?  Didn't digital printers also take a lot of "people's
jobs?"  

Besides, a Brooks robot is just imitating human-scale movement while
3dprinters create objects in micron-accurate ways that no human can
possibly do at all. So clearly the 3dprinter is a more radical threat
to the status quo.

Along this same line: Chris Anderson, late of WIRED, has got a new
book out about "Makers." I read it.  It's all about how network society
cadres with 3dprinters and open-source schematics and instructables
are going to create a "Third Industrial Revolution."  Great, right? 
Okay, maybe Makers take over the world or they don't, but how come
nobody says "A Third Industrial Revolution means those Makers are going
to take our jobs?"  Because they would, wouldn't they?  How could they
not? 

Shouldn't this prospect be of larger concern than Rodney Brooks'
latest gizmo, one among hordes of assembly line robots that have been
around for decades now?  An "Industrial Revolution" should *almost be
definition* take everybody's jobs.  But the general reaction to
Anderson's book is that the guy is *too optimistic," that he drank his
own tech-hype bathwater and is having way too much fun.  Isn't there an
inconsistency here?

Then there's the latest Kevin Kelly argument, which is more or less
about how robots are gonna take everybody's jobs, but fine, that's
great, especially if they're sexbots.  There's nothing sparkly-new
about this line of reasoning, it's very Automation Takes Command.  The
pitch is that robots take the dull dirty and dangerous jobs, which
frees us to become, I dunno, humane speculative creatives like Kevin
Kelly, I guess.

However, I don't believe automation has ever worked like that; there's
no creeping wave-line with "robotics" on one side and "humanity" on
the other.  Playing chess is very "human," but Deep Blue is a robot
that can kick everybody's ass at chess.  You can claim that "Deep Blue"
is not "a robot," but come on: just put a tin face on him and give him
a manipulator arm.  Instant "robot."  Robotic has never been an issue
of mechanical men versus flesh men, like in a Flash Gordon episode.

The stuff we call "robotics" today is more like Google's "robot car,"
which is not some Karel Capek man-shaped "robot" of the 1920s; the
Google Car is the Google Stack with wheels attached to it.  Similarly,
"Google Glass" isn't virtual-reality supergoggles, it's the Google
Stack with a camera, Android mobile software and a head-mounted
display.  Will they "take your jobs?"  How could they not?

If you lose your job as a bus driver because a Google Bus took your
job, you didn't lose it to a "robot," you lost your enterprise to
Google, just like the newspapers did.  Don't bother to put a sexbot
face on the silly thing, it's Larry and Sergei & Co.  Go find a
musician and buy him a drink.

Fighter pilots are "losing their jobs to robots," to aerial drones. 
Are those the "dull dirty and dangerous" jobs?  Heck no, because
fighter jocks are romantic folk heroes, like Eddie Rickenbacker and the
Red Baron and George Bush 1.0.  When most flight work is carried out
by "robots"  (actually by GPS systems and databases, but so what), are
we somehow going to discover a more refined and human way to fly?  Will
we be liberated to fly in a more spiritual, humanistic, Beryl Markham
poetic aviatrix kind of way?  I very much doubt that.  I'm pretty sure
we'll stop "flying" entirely, even if we anachronistically claim we're
"flying" when we're zipping around in sporty ultralights letting drone
systems do all the labor.

Bookstore clerks never had "dull, dirty, dangerous" work, they were
the mainstays of humanistic commerce actually, but Amazon is a Stack. 
Amazon's all about giant robot warehouse distribution logistics.  It's
all databases and forklifts in the Amazon stack, so of course "robots"
took the jobs of bookstore clerks. Bookstore clerks imagined they were
chumming around with the literate community turning people on the Jane
Austen, but the high-touch, humanly clingy aspect of this line of work
changed nothing much about its obsolescence.

So it's not that "robots" take "our jobs." It's more a situation of
general employement precarity where applications built for mobile
devices and databases can hit pretty much anybody's line of work, more
or less at random, without a prayer of effective counter-action. 
Right?  Let's move right along, then! 

That being the case, "what ought to be done?"  Well, if job security
of all kinds is going to be made precarious indefinitely, then the
sane, humane thing to do is clearly to socialize security and put
everybody on a guaranteed annual income.  Brazilian-style socialism:
keep your nose clean, keep the kids in school, and we fee you off and
you can go buy whatever produce the robots have cooked up lately.  

One might also invent some kind of Stack Fordism, where Facebook pays
you enough to hang out on Facebook making Facebook more omniscient. 
It's a lot cheaper than putting the unemployed into prison.

Obviously the American right-wing isn't gonna go for this wacky
liberal scheme; bailing out the "takers" of the 47% is their worst
Randroid nightmare.  But what people never understood about the John
Henry story is that we have no steam hammers left.  The robots "take
your job" and then the robots *keep changing at a frantic pace,* the
robots have the lifespans of hamsters.  We've still got plenty of
muscular, human John Henries, but his steam hammers are all extinct.

Look what happened to Nokia.  These Nokia guys had the classic Wired
magazine bulletproofed dream jobs.  They're not John Henry.  They're
creative class, computer-literate, inventive, super-efficient, global,
digital, Asperger's high-IQ types...  They got annihilated in 18
months. Not by "robots" but by Google and Apple.   However, well, same
difference really.  

What kind of "jobs" do Republicans have to offer themselves, when
their nominee was a corporate raider, and their top financier is a
weird Jewish casino owner up to the eyebrows in Macao?  That's not
exactly the Protestant work ethic happening, so, well, I dunno.  

It might still work, just needs more political pretzel-bending.  Don't
use the word "guaranteed income," farm it out to Fox News for semantic
re-framing.   Toss in the "values requirement" that your annual income
requires you to wear Mormon undies, go to tent revival meetings and
own and display a handgun. They'd line up for it.
  
## 105 of 186: Jamais Cascio via E-mail (captward) Wed 2 Jan 13 11:34

    
Thanks, Bruce.

With regards to the robot took my job idea -- something that Paul
Krugman, Kevin Kelly, and Cory Doctorow have all decided to weigh in on
lately -- the one thing that everyone seems to miss is that there's an
entire sector that's going to be the last stand of human employment:
empathy-driven work, largely done by women.

Here's the piece I wrote about this a few months ago:
http://openthefuture.com/2012/05/the_pink_collar_future.html

School teacher, nurse, stylist, all sorts of jobs that may be
technically doable with a machine, but in practice depend upon empathy
and emotional awareness as much as technical skill. So what happens
when the most reliable work comes in the shape of work traditionally
done by women? Does it change gender role dynamics? Do wages get driven
down because of a flood of otherwise-unemployed men trying to get
these jobs, or do they go up because a nurse is harder to replace than
a surgeon?

Robots aren't going to be taking most of our jobs in the next decade,
but the writing's on the wall here.
  
## 106 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 2 Jan 13 11:44

    
Gender role dynamics are already changing, this is just a more
energetic nudge away from the lipstick mode of thinking. And wages are
driven down because demand for jobs exceeds supply, and then some. Then
again, you can churn out thousands of nurse-graduates, but how many
nurses have both affinity and empathy? So nurses might be cheap, but
really good nurses might be able to name their price. Either way, is
gender relevant?
  
## 107 of 186: Justin Pickard vie E-mail (captward) Wed 2 Jan 13 12:06

    
Thanks, Bruce. As a follow-up, do you see the position and status of
the Stacks as stable? Are there wannabes waiting in the wings? I'm
thinking of the 'whale fall', where a dead whale is almost immediately
consumed by scavengers, of when a large tree is cut in a rainforest,
opening the space for competitors. Punctuated equilibrium? Is the
ecosystem metaphor useful, here, or are we looking at something else
entirely?
  
## 108 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 13 12:17

    
http://qz.com/39890/chinas-new-triumphalist-aircraft-carrier-coins-celebrate-growing-military-might/

*I don't want to get all China-bashing this year; I happen to be quite
the Sinophile -- but do these shiny new coins with an aircraft carrier
on 'em give anybody a warm and cozy feeling?

*I'm sure that China can sell saber-rattling to the home team, but
somebody could screw up. Times of tension tempt adventurers. Imagine
you're a Chinese Moslem-separatist Al Qaeda guy, and reading a screed
like the following.  You might get all Bin Laden and think, "Wow, I bet
some cheap, bloody terror attack on distant Japan could result in my
oppressors in Beijing getting stomped, going broke, or both."

http://www.smh.com.au/opinion/politics/caught-in-a-bind-that-threatens-an-asian-war-nobody-wants-20121225-2bv38.html#ixzz2GAKA8VUy
  
## 109 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 2 Jan 13 21:04

    
JADP: "Bruce Sterling: The Complete Interview, 2013"
http://www.40kbooks.com/?p=13726

New fiction: _Love is Strange (A Paranormal Romance)_ published for
the Kindle:
http://www.amazon.com/Love-Strange-Paranormal-Romance-ebook/dp/B00ASBPAWY/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1357189013&sr=8-1&keywords=love+is+strange+bruce+sterling
  
## 110 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 13 02:07

    
I dunno how I conflated the name of Aaron Straup Cope into "Strope" up
there in #52; I'm guessing it's neural damage.  

For the record, Aaron Straup Cope is Senior Engineer, Digital and
Emerging Media, Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, Smithsonian
Institution (New York City, New York, U.S.A.); and I'd pay some
attention to him if I were you.

I'd recommend following Aaron Straup Cope and most any of his
colleagues here, including the bots.

https://twitter.com/bruces/new-aestheticians/members

Sorry Aaron; I'll have the plaque flushed from my brain as soon as
they come up with a quantified hack.


    
  
## 111 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 13 02:08

    
Thanks for sparing my blushes on the new novel there, Jon.  I don't
write as many as I used to, and they seem to be getting lots weirder.
  
## 112 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 13 02:14

    
"Netbooks" are dying because the Stacks are winning.

http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/dec/31/netbooks-dead-2013
  
## 113 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 3 Jan 13 03:06

    
Thanks for the pointer to your new-aestheticians list Bruce.

https://twitter.com/bruces/ar-pundits is a beauty as well.
  
## 114 of 186: Roland Legrand (roland) Thu 3 Jan 13 04:53

    
Talking about futurism and 'social futurism' - Jamais says in his
essay 'social futurism is significantly more difficult than techno
futurism. Without a clear model for socio-cultural change, and absent
the appearance of a Hari Seldon complete with almost infallible
mathematics of social behavior*, we have to go by experience, gut
instinct, and the intentional misapplication of training in History,
Anthropology, Sociology.'

Gut instinct, intentional misapplication of training - it all sounds
rather nice and interesting, but can something more concrete be said
about how 'social futurists' should work? Are there 'best practices' or
are we talking about an artsy activity depending on the originality
and inspiration of the futurist-artist? 
  
## 115 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 13 06:40

    
I like the term coined by my colleague (at
http://www.realityaugmentedblog.com/) Amber Case: cyborg anthropology.
In response to your question, Roland, I think we need more of these:
future-focused investigators who have a degree of human empathy and
understanding (as the best anthropologists will have), and are also
technology focused. Complex sociopolitical currents are hard to follow
and predict if you have a more purely tech-focused engineering mindset
(acknowledging that I'm perpetuating a stereotype).

And yes, maybe the cyborg anthropologist is more of an artist than an
engineer... and we're constantly pushing the envelope, extending the
meaning of "art."
  
## 116 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 13 06:47

    
http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/business/2013/01/02/al-jazeera-current-tv-al-gore/1805685/

*I told you the Qataris were the victors of the Global War on Terror.
  
## 117 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 3 Jan 13 07:48

    
Ironic that their mission statement reads like something our own media
should be practicing...political footsie immediately follows.

"Al Jazeera shared Current TV's mission "to give voice to those who
are not typically heard; to speak truth to power; to provide
independent and diverse points of view; and to tell the stories that no
one else is telling."

Time Warner's response...

"Al Jazeera has long struggled to get carriage in the U.S., and the
deal suffered an immediate casualty as Time Warner Cable, the nation's
second-largest cable TV operator, announced it would drop Current TV
due to the deal."

Time Warner Cable's mission statement: (http://tinyurl.com/a8elqu6)
Edited on: 2011-05-17
"Connect people and businesses with information, entertainment and
each other. Give customers control in a way that are simple and easy."

Well, apparently NOT! 
  
## 118 of 186: Jamais Cascio (jamaiscascio) Thu 3 Jan 13 09:14

    
Roland, Jon's right: this is futurism as anthropology. At the
Institute for the Future (40+ year old non-profit foresight group,
based in Palo Alto), a significant plurality of the researchers there
come from educational backgrounds in Anthropology (including me, btw).

That said, I'm advocating in that essay for giving social, cultural,
and political drivers the same conceptual weight that we (in the
futurist-for-hire community) usually give the broad scope of stuff we
call "technology." I strive (not always successfully) to give it *more*
weight; a common line in many of my talks is that "technology is a
cultural artifact," and that we can't divorce our tools from the
society and desires that led to their creation.
  
## 119 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 13 10:21

    
Welcome, Jamais; thanks for joining us.
  
## 120 of 186: Jamais Cascio (jamaiscascio) Thu 3 Jan 13 10:39

    
Thank *you*, Jon, for the invitation!
  
## 121 of 186: Roland Legrand (roland) Thu 3 Jan 13 11:49

    
Thank you for your answer, Jamais. I'm convinced that futurism as
anthropology gives deeper and more relevant insights. But how do you
evaluate and compare competing accounts about dynamics and possible
consequences? I guess just judging their success in predicting
developments is not enough? 
  
## 122 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 13 12:10

    
I'm sure that eager readers won't want to miss out on this NORTH
Korean pop music.

http://musicformaniacs.blogspot.com/2011/05/pyongyang-rock-city-part-1.html
  
## 123 of 186: Jamais Cascio (jamaiscascio) Thu 3 Jan 13 13:12

    
Roland, one of the major methodological changes in professional
foresight over the past few decades has been the rise and dominance of
the multiple-scenario approach. Taking different combinations of
potential drivers and different *manifestations* of those drivers lets
you come up with a set of plausible alternative futures. The idea is
that you can then test your strategies, assumptions, plans, etc.
against these different possibilities to better measure how robust said
strategies, etc., could be.

The analogy that I've taken to using in my talks over the past few
years is that foresight is like a vaccination -- it sensitizes the body
(of the organization) to potential risks that might otherwise have
been ignored until too late. That doesn't mean that you'll encounter
all of those risks, or that they'll play out exactly as predicted, but
you'll be in a much better position to identify them early.
  
## 124 of 186: Patrick Lichty (patrickl) Thu 3 Jan 13 14:41

    
Hi, everyone, and sorry I'm a little late.  Actually, a LOT late in
finally coming here to The Well in context of how many of my friends
are here and for how long.  I was talking with Jon Lebkowsky yesterday
about the SOTW posts and he said for me to jump in, and here I am.

FILTERING AS ONTOLOGY
I agree with Jon in regards to filtering content - right now there
seems to be an exponential burst this year and IMO sometimes it only
makes sense to aggregate and check trending, although the individual
gem gets lost.  But maybe as I said in an essay called Art in the Age
of Dataflow, maybe narrative today is indexical and trend-based, and
those who try to drink from the firehose are like the kid from that
classic scene from Weird Al Yankovic's UHF.  

So, so far some of us at RealityAugmented seem to be wingpersons of
pattern recognition and kindred Cyborg Anthropologists.  I like the
threads of humanity and empathy that are being associated, as I think
we're going to need these soon.

TURKS ARE REALLY INTERESTING
I also agree with Bruce on the Turks as being a group to watch.  I
wound up, in my early-adopter way, hanging out with the Istanbul Media
Art crowd, and they're really interesting, with a great insight.  They
have taken me to school for 3 PhDs in wold awareness and for that I'm
grateful.  A big hat's off to Iz Oztat, Eden Unluata, and Basak Senova
for that.

WHAT DID I THINK GOT MISSED IN THE FIRST FEW SALVOS?
1: The New Aesthetic is a complex beast.
What seemed to be an questionably thought out afterthought of a
'movement', and I like Ian Bogost's criticism of NA in The Atlantic in
that it lacks the ideology of previous movements and needs to 'get a
lot weirder'.

What I find interesting is that after the talk, Jasmes Bridle has
reopened the site as well as one devoted to drones, which has drawn
myself, Jordan Crandall, Trevor Paglen, Honor Harger, Ricardo Dominguez
and a host of others into an ongoing conversation that might have not
survived if it were not for a certain essay.  But here we are.  

The other thing I find interesting with NA as it has developed is that
it seems to have categorized into a number of different genres, such
as autonomous imaging (drones, et al), Glitching, and
algorism/autopoesis/generativity. All three of these fit the scope of
machine imagery, and as I'll talk about shortly on RealityAugmented,
it's a continuum of autonomy and control between the creator, audience,
and device.  

As I said earlier this year, since James Bridle was initially
interested in NA for a year, maybe I'll announce at SXSW that I'm
officially uninterested after a year, and I hope you take that as a dry
joke. Basically, I find NA interesting as an anthrological site as
much as an art movement.

2: DRONES AT COSTCO? Hello...?!?!
When Richard Grusin of the Center for 21st Century Studies showed me
his picture of this, it made me wish I had dentures to drop.  I then
shared the culture of toy drones with  my friend Art Jones, who was
then doing a performance called 'The Selector' in Karachi with the
State Department.  He passed on my links about the
abjection/abstractionof drone culture here in the States to the people
of Karachi with wonder and amazement.  It also caused me to create the
People's DIY Drone Brigade, which is allied with the Overpass Light
Bridage in Milwaukee.  I have yet to be arrested for taking a Costco
drone and having it surveill a Chicago Police Department Blue Box, but
we're waiting.

OPEN SOURCE CONVERGENCES
There are some amazing things happening out there in the open source
movement, from 3D printable databases to mergings between Arduino,
Android, and the Processing programming language (read: Java Lite for
Artists).  The fact that all of this stuff is starting to turn into one
big contiguous toolbox is pretty amazing - plug your phone into a
widget that can have any number of modules and hook that to your
MacBook, and go hack some Big Data with some off the shelf code.  Hell!
Go grab a 3D model and hack a little code to glitch the hell out of
the Venus De Milo.

ALL THE SHIT BEING FUNDED ON KICKSTARTER
Holy Cow. From Smartduino systems to Moore's Cloud (OK, that one
didn't get funded, but hey, it's wildly cool), there is R&D VC coming
out everybody's ears for anything remotely cool, despite the fact that
we're pretty burnt out by this point.  But man, I want that shiny
thing.

In addition, there are some awesome books coming out, like Generative
Design, which has the single best treasure trove of code for taming Big
Data I've ever seen.  The problem with being a futurist in these days
is what William Gibson once told me about writing near-future fiction,
it's as McLuhan said - being aware of the present looks just like the
future, as not only is everyone else living in the past, anyone nimble
enough to live in the present might as well be living in the future.
Therefore, being a futurist, is merely reportage from the front lines
today.

BRUCE MENTIONED THE 3D PRINTER GUYS, BUT IT'S THAT COOL.
I have two now.  This stuff is crazy - I scanned my friend and printed
her portrait out, and I take it to every restaurant we go out to, and
within 30 seconds, people are asking about it.  Autodesk is letting all
these cool tools I saw at TED 2010 out for free, like photogrammetric
3D capture tools and iPad 3D sculpting. I'm gobsmacked  by some of this
stuff.  Printed toys out for my Great Nieces this Xmas - they loved
the fact that I made them the toys.  Replicator - Earl Grey, Hot,
please.

This is enough ranting for now, and it only says that we are living
the Chinese curse of living in interesting times, and I'm glad to have
lists and friends like Jon to co-filter them.

Onwards!
  
## 125 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 3 Jan 13 16:48

    
Roland, there was a great interview on Inkwell.vue 238, back in 2005,
with Derek Woodgate and Wayne Pethrick about their book Future
Frequencies which touches on some of what Jamais refers to. Think you
might enjoy it:

https://user.well.com/engaged.cgi?&c=inkwell.vue&t=238&q=0-19&f=0
  
## 126 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 13 01:33

    

*I'm sure there's some gloomy reason why this latest news from
Belgrade is really terrible for everybody, but I'm too lazy to think
that up.

*Oh wait: it's about jets, so it's carbon-loading, it's
climate-crisis.  There, it really is a pretty morbid business after
all, so I hope the local doomsters are happy now.



"Serbia's Belgrade Airport records busiest year in history


"EX-YU Aviation News - 04.01.2013  (((There really ought to be "EX-YU"
tshirts, pennants and bumper stickers; the tourist trade is missing a
good bet here.)))

"Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport recorded its busiest year on record
since opening its doors back in 1962. Nikola Tesla Airport welcomed
3.363.919 passengers, a 7.7% improvement on 2011. 

"As a result, Belgrade surpassed its previous busiest year, 1987, when
it saw 3.311.951 passengers pass through its doors. Besides an
extensive domestic and European network at the time, the airport also
offered direct flights to Africa, Asia, Australia and North America.

"Furthermore, that same year, JAT Yugoslav Airlines  (((Why do they
still call it that?))) handled 4.531.000 passengers.

"Belgrade Airport recorded a busy December. It handled 224.869
passengers compared to 217.684 in 2011, an increase of 3.3%. This is
despite a significant drop in the number of operated flights. A total
of 3.202 arrivals and departures were recorded, down from 3.425 the
year before. Belgrade has retained its position as the busiest airport
in the former Yugoslavia...."
  
## 127 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 13 05:57

    
Bryan Alexander just posted this on Facebook: "Last night I dreamed
that Amazon.com was hiring nuclear engineers."

Meanwhile, from Global Voices:

http://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/01/01/irans-supreme-leader-behind-enemy-lines-with-new-facebook-page/

"Amid all the discussions about launching a halal or national Internet
in Iran, Ayatollah Khamenei, the Supreme Leader, took everybody by
surprise with a new Facebook page launched on December 13, 2012. We are
talking about the same Facebook, which for most Iranian citizens to
access requires special software or a Virtual Private Network to bypass
the country’s strict filtering! The news became official on December
15 when Mr. Khamenei’s Twitter account, believed to be run by his
office, promoted the page by posting a link to it. According to The
Guardian, Khamenei's official website has not yet confirmed the
existence of the page, but the conservative news site Baztab reported
that the account was run by his office."
  
## 128 of 186: Ed Ward (captward) Fri 4 Jan 13 06:02

    
Apropos of absolutely nothing said in the past half-dozen posts, I
wanted to note that as soon as I saw the link, I downloaded Bruce's new
book Love Is Strange (and not just because Mickey Baker died this
year), and started reading it last night. I'm now on Location 1517 of
6876, 22% of the way in, and, except for having to report those
numbers, which essentially tell me nothing, I'm enjoying it a lot.

Okay, carry on...
  
## 129 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 13 06:55

    

http://openthefuture.com/2012/05/the_pink_collar_future.html

*I'm a little unclear on how robot labor is supposed to create a new
pink-collar class of feminized empathy workers.  It seems to me about
as likely that a dissolving middle class would simply return to its
origins as the household servants of the privileged rich.  Scratch a
one-percenter, find an illegal nanny.  Being a live-in foster mom is an
empathy and emotional-awareness job for sure.
  
## 130 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 13 07:20

    

I really enjoy reading history -- especially HISTORICAL history,
histories that are themselves really old.

For instance, here's "Manners, Customs, and Dress During the Middle
Ages, and During the Renaissance Period," By Paul Lacroix (1806-1884.)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Lacroix

Here Lacroix is describing why Dark Age feudalism cracked up around
1100 AD, as cities and urban politics began to spread out of Italy. 
Obviously something like that really happened, you can study surviving
buildings, material objects,  read surviving political and financial
records, you can see that a lot of people who used to be dirt-poor
serfs are becoming citizens, and so forth.   It happened, it's
historical truth.   But, as Jamais puts it, "Why?"  What's the reason,
where's the causality?  What were the trends?  What made that happen?

Lacroix says (in English translation):

"Two strong impulses, originating from two totally dissimilar centres
of action, irresistibly propelled this great social revolution, with
its various and endless aspects, affecting all central Europe, and
being more or less felt in the west, the north, and the south. On one
side, the Greek and Latin partiality for ancient corporations, modified
by a democratic element, and an innate feeling of opposition
characteristic of barbaric tribes; and on the other, the free spirit
and equality of the old Celtic tribes rising suddenly against the
military hierarchy, which was the offspring of conquest. Europe was
roused by the double current of ideas which simultaneously urged her on
to a new state of civilisation, and more particularly to a new
organization of city life."

*Sounds so great!  You're reading this description of a great social
ferment, you get all swept up in the majestic Hegelian scope of it... 
However....

"impulses" "centres of action" "irresistible propulsion" "great social
revolution" "aspects" "partiality"  "a democratic element" "innate
feeling" "barbarian characteristic" "free spirit" "double current of
ideas" "urge" "new state" "new organization"

*What ARE those?  Can any of these be measured?  Do they have any
objective existence as actual phenomena?  Would anything in this
reasoning change if you just switched them around at random, so that
the "characteristics" were the "elements,"  while the "aspects" were
the "partialities"? 

Are they falsifiable?  Are they in any way predictive?  "Greeks plus
Celts make a Renaissance."  Okay, how do you know that?  What's wrong
with, positing, "French plus Byzantines make a Renaissance?"

I don't want to be a big philistine about Lacroix's writing -- like I
say, I read heaps of history, and I even have a taste for art and
literary critique, not to mention postmodern theory -- but if you want
to be a big-picture "social futurist" instead of some squinty
trend-reading numbers guy, you're in a tarpit of this stuff.  

We may think we're doing better 'cause we're "cyborg anthropologists,"
but will the passage of a hundred years deal with that coinage kindly?
 I have to wonder.
  
## 131 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 13 10:23

    
My Reality Augmented colleague Tyger AC posted an summary of 2012
cyborg news and trends here:
http://spacecollective.org/Wildcat/8121/ReBeComing-Human-2012-an-Optimistic-Perspective

He quotes CNN re our colleague Amber Case
(http://edition.cnn.com/2012/12/05/tech/cyborg-anthropology-amber-case/?hpt=hp_c3):

“Cyborg anthropology is the study of the interaction between humans
and technology, and how technology affects culture. Mobile technology
allows one to stand almost anywhere in the world, whisper something,
and be heard elsewhere. These devices that live in our pockets need to
be fed every night require our frequent attention. In only a few years
these devices have become stitched into the fabric of our everyday
lives. Phones offer us respite from the boredom of waiting in lines,
but they also inhibit us when they run out of batteries. In traditional
anthropology, somebody goes to another country, says: "How fascinating
these people are! How interesting their tools and their culture are,"
and then they write a paper, and maybe a few other anthropologists read
it, and we think these cultures are very exotic. Cyborg
anthropologists step back from the modern world and look at the
everyday life and how the people around us are influenced by technology
in everyday life.”
  
## 132 of 186: Roger Weeks via E-mail (captward) Fri 4 Jan 13 10:50

    
<130> "We may think we're doing better 'cause we're "cyborg
anthropologists," but will the passage of a hundred years deal with
that coinage kindly? I have to wonder."

Cyborg, and indeed all the other words we've created that start with
cyber: cyberspace, cyberwar, cybernetics, cyberpunk - all of them sound
very dated to me. Very 20th century, as it were. The prefix is even
older than our modern usage of it, but I associate all of these words
with the cold war and the futurism that flourished then. Should we
really be using them to talk about the future?
  
## 133 of 186: Susan Sarandon, tractors, etc. (rocket) Fri 4 Jan 13 11:21

    
What Is HotWired?
HotWired is new thinking for a new medium. We call it a cyberstation, a
suite of vertical content streams about the Digital Revolution and the
Second Renaissance with an integrated community space.

-- HotWired FAQ, 1994
  
## 134 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 13 12:50

    
<captward>: I agree about overuse of "cyber" then and now, and I don't
use it very much, but I think "cyborg" is a good and useful term
that'll stay relevant. I first saw it used in a comic book, I think in
the early 60s; then and thereafter most uses I saw assumed that a
cyborg was a human implanted with enhanced technology, or perhaps
percolated (like the replicants in "Blade Runner") in labs, a
combination of organic and artificial parts. In a 1990s conversation
with my former FringeWare partner, genius coder Paco Nathan, talking
about Menstat (software he developed for tracking ovulation cycles) and
projecting the development of what we now call "quanitified self"), I
realized that anyone using digital technology could be considered a
cybernetic organism, or cyborg. The definition of the term could be
broader, an enhancement doesn't have to be implanted within (or built
with) the organism. From that point on, the term seemed to me more
relevant and substantial.
  
## 135 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Fri 4 Jan 13 20:25

    
I wonder if 2013 is the era when software bots finally become useful.  I've
been working on some technology related to them, and it seems like there's
some almost-ready-for-early-adopter level technology about to break through.
I've been playing with weavrs a bit, though they're more of a social gizmo,
I think they're giving people a sense that maybe the time is right.

<http://www.weavrs.com/find/>

I've got a SXSW talk this year about bots that present as human, and as
research I read a copy of Andrew Leonard's Bots (which I found in my garage
while cataloging a bunch of stuff to give away to my friends).  In it he
goes into the history of MU* bots and IRC bots, and quotes Negroponte and a
bunch of folks from the early 80's dreaming about having bots that would
control your house or whatnot.  It seems like the API economy and the
Internet of Things and the cloud means that all the pieces are in place to
actually make that happen.

As an aside on the sharing economy, put up over 300 items, and only managed
to give away a tenth of that.  My takeaway was that people don't really want
more stuff, they want the visceral and emotional experience related to
aquiring it, and reading through a huge web page of books just doesn't give
that thrill.  A book you find for $1 in the bargain bin of a used book store
is a lot more attractive than one of your friends cast-offs.
  
## 136 of 186: Audrey E via E-mail (captward) Sat 5 Jan 13 00:56

    
Something interesting to add to the discussion of pink collar work:
<http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/trickle-down-feminism>

"the conditions that have long defined domestic work and service
work—instability, lack of training, lack of career pathways, low
pay—are now increasingly the reality for all American workers, not just
women. When we focus on equal access at the top, we miss out the real
story, which historian Bethany Moreton points out, “is not ‘Oh wow,
women get to be lawyers,’ but that men get to be casualized clerks.”"
  
## 137 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 13 02:43

    
If you don't like "cyborg anthropologist," how 'bout "furniture
anthropologist"?

http://www.fastcompany.com/3004140/steelcases-anthropologist-remaking-offices-create-happier-workers

I don't worry too much about the corny prefix "cyber," because I
figure that it will takes its just place among its many cousins: 
electro, automato, robo, jet-propelled, atomic, streamlined,
radio-controlled, tele-whatever...  They certainly lose their novelty,
but that doesn't mean that the phenomena they describe  go away.  When
everything is "cyber" then nothing can be "cyber," but "cyber" was and
is a big change in the world.

They do not evaporate, they just sink down within the great wheels of
planetary change-gradient; that which was fashion will become a
business, that which was business will buy into government, that which
was legalized will become infrastructural, that which was constructed
will become cultural, that which was cultural will decay into the Next
Nature adulterated compost from which tomorrow's fresh shoots will
emerge...  Entropy Requires No Maintenance.
  
## 138 of 186: Gary Gach (ggg) Sat 5 Jan 13 09:51

    
[ elsewhere on the interweb, this, by <bruces> to budding sci-fi
writers : http://zite.to/135BP4G  
  
## 139 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 13 01:23

    
Exciting new forms of labor under market-centric black globalization: 
Slavery.


http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2012/12/slaverys-global-comeback/266354/
  
## 140 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 13 06:53

    
I sit surrounded by a backlog of mostly unread texts: almost done with
Steven Johnson's interesting but forgettable _Future Perfect_, behind
it Jon Ronson's _Lost at Sea_, an old still-undigested copy of
Adbusters on "American Autumn," _Faster Cheaper Better_ by Michael
Hammer, _The Fabric of Reality_ and _The Beginning of Infinity_ by
David Deutsch, _Virtual Worlds_ by Benjamin Woolley, _Simians, Cyborgs,
and Women_ by Donna Haraway, _The Pale King_ by David Foster Wallace,
and old issue of "Parabola" on the subject of Attention, _Proust and
the Squid_ by Maryanne Wolfe, several recent issues of the New Yorker,
a new issue of Tricycle, recent issues of Wired Magazine, various books
on web development, content strategy, specific platforms (Drupal and
Wordpress)... and more scattered elsewhere around the house. I have two
gigs that are both focused on website development, and spend much of
my day reading and writing online as these books and periodicals are
accumulating on the periphery of my time and energy. I blog irregularly
like so many of my colleagues, uncertain who's reading, whether the
time spent blogging is useful - would it be better spent writing for
pay? Or working on a long-deferred book (or books, I have more than one
idea). My original goal in life was to write professionally, and I've
done that but never as my primary source of income. I wonder now how
worthwhile the activity of writing is, when so much content is produced
and so little of it read, even less read mindfully. I consider the
predicament of new writers: it's unlikely that anyone not already
established can command attention today. There's no way to establish
the authority or quality of your writing, if you hadn't done so in the
era of mass publishing, when it publication suggested that you had been
vetted as worthwhile.

Speaking of "mindfully," I followed Gary's link to io9 and found a
marginal link to this article: http://io9.com/sherlock-holmes/ "How to
Think Like Sherlock Holmes - and Have a Better Life." A fan of the
Holmes persona, and contemporary versions (Robert Downey in the films,
Benedict Cumberbatch and Jonny Lee Miller on television), and having a
Buddhist/mindfulness practice, I'd already made the same connection the
article makes. It doesn't mention Buddhism, but says "...in order to
break from that autopiloted mode, we have to be motivated to think in a
mindful, present fashion, to exert effort on what goes through our
heads instead of going with the flow." That's a core aspect of Buddhist
meditation practice; it's also been adopted as a concept/method/trend
within contemporary psychology:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mindfulness_(psychology)

It's a challenge, practicing mindfulness while standing in the full
firehose flow of diverse content online, in books and periodicals,
through broadcast media and films. I'm a power consumer of media - I
used to write a column called "Media Man," as a journalism student over
40 years ago, already into the potential for media convergence,
setting myself up as a critic across media. It was exciting to follow
the evolution of the Internet as a platform for all media, opening the
means of production to all comers. But when everyone is talking, who's
listening?
  
## 141 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 6 Jan 13 09:36

    
That's one of the big problems right now. There is so much data, so
much connectedness, that now matter how well you tool and filter it
down to your own particulars, it's still too much!

So, how do we attack that problem? Is there an app for that? Would
that even change the 'too much' problem? I doubt it. It's only going to
increase exponentially. 

I think we're going to have to explore other options in how we deal
with data and networks going forward. I don't have an answer for that.
Personally, I'm dialing everything down and stepping back from it all;
trying to reassess and integrate this deluge into my own future(s).

How are other people dealing with this?
  
## 142 of 186: Nathan Stack via E-mail (captward) Sun 6 Jan 13 11:28

    
From what direction does research in media filtering seem most
promising? 
-Google's search bubble
-Applying tools for a group that has extreme issues with filtering
information from noise and applying to general population
-App store noodles on the wall approach by developers
-Digging through existing technology like spamblock and applying it
broadly

Did I miss any other approaches to the problem
  
## 143 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky: Errata (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 13 11:41

    
In my post <134>, I erroneously addressed began my response to <132>
with an assumption that it was <captward>'s, but it was his post of a
comment sent by Roger Weeks from off-WELL.
  
## 144 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 13 11:45

    
<tcn> asks, in <141>, how we attack the problem of so much data and
connectedness - the problem of overload. Earlier in the discussion I
referred to the concept of the "wicked problem":

"... a problem that is difficult or impossible to solve because of
incomplete, contradictory, and changing requirements that are often
difficult to recognize. The term ‘wicked’ is used, not in the sense of
evil but rather its resistance to resolution. Moreover, because of
complex interdependencies, the effort to solve one aspect of a wicked
problem may reveal or create other problems."

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wicked_problem
  
## 145 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 6 Jan 13 11:57

    
(Slippage)

Nathan, I don't want to sidetrack this conversation, so I'll give a
brief response and be done with it. 

(jonl) and I are both fans of Howard Rheingold and have taken his
MindAmp classes, where he really gets into "tools" and what's
available. Much of that has been recapped in his book Netsmart:How to
Thrive Online
(http://tinyurl.com/co6ndxz).

Meanwhile I've been musing on Tim O'Reilly's current mantra:
Create more value than you capture. 

All that aside, the big issues remain: global warming, climate change,
economic disruption, on and on. Are we going to have a world where I
can continue to play on the Internet? What's it going to look like? How
can I help to change and shape it?

Back to Bruce and Jon.
  
## 146 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 13 11:59

    
(More slippage, waving at Ted...)

I think "wicked problem" also applies to Nathan Stack's question, in
<142>, about media filtering. Filtering technologies are problematic:
they're supposed to help us access the information we really want/need,
but they also potentially exclude information that we might also want
or need to see (because algorithms are imperfect), and as Eli Pariser
has pointed out, they'll tend to feed us information that we find
agreeable, excluding information that might (productively) challenge
our thinking. So I'd like to see research into fuzzier filtering
methodologies, and into the kind of digital literacy required to see in
and around filters. Some of us assumed that the Internet would provide
many perspectives, and that we could build a model of the world closer
to the truth by seeing it through many lenses. I'm not sure that
works, and I'm more sure that it doesn't work if your aggressively
filter...
  
## 147 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 6 Jan 13 12:11

    
Congrats Bruce and Jon, this conversation already made it to the
Atlantic...(http://tinyurl.com/bqxqq46)
  
## 148 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 6 Jan 13 12:14

    
(waving back)

<fuzzier filtering methodologies>

Love it. I can see a new app already, 'FuzzyFilters', the race is on
:)
  
## 149 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 6 Jan 13 13:44

    
Not to worry, our phones will save us!

Doc Searles has a lot to say about Android as a Life Management
Platform
(http://tinyurl.com/ac95zr2).

Tho I think he may want to revise that now that Samsung is moving away
from Android and teaming up with Intel (http://tinyurl.com/bharvqp)

All good for open source.
  
## 150 of 186: Roland Legrand (roland) Sun 6 Jan 13 15:19

    
We discussed so many developments already, but I'd like to add another
one: education. Will we witness this year the breakthrough of the
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) both in their more institutional
format (Coursera, edX, Udacity...) as in the more distributed and
open-ended formats (Stephen Downes, George Siemens, ds106...)? What
does it mean for the conventional universities (a number of the most
important ones are involved in the MOOC-development) and their business
models? Will they go the way of print media formats, and what does it
mean for education & society? 
  

 ## 151 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Sun 6 Jan 13 16:05

    
Now I feel bad for getting <jonl> a book for Christmas.

I went on vacation this week, and brought along Nate Silver's book on
statistics, Nassim Taleb's Antifragile and Hannu Rajaniemi's followup to The
Quantum Thief.  None of them got cracked, and I discovered that much like
traveling with a 15 month old, traveling with a 15 month old, 8 year old and
a dog doesn't leave much time for quiet consumption of long-form content.
  
## 152 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 6 Jan 13 16:11

    
Yup..short-term attention, short-form content seem to be what's
occurring all the way around. Hopefully, some combination of Artificial
Intelligence and Personal Assistant magically concocted with
algorithms and code will allow us to get back to long term and form. Or
have those days gone by forever?
  
## 153 of 186: Roland Legrand (roland) Mon 7 Jan 13 05:34

    
Or maybe, Ted, long from will become the new chic? Just like being
able to disconnect from our ubiquitous networks will be a sign of
special standing? 
  
## 154 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 13 07:24

    
One of the downsides of being a jet-setter is falling out of the sky. 
A jet disaster is a cruel blow, but to have somebody vanish from the
sky without a trace adds the torment of suspense to grief.  

The Missoni family are such interesting, unusual people; they're the
last Italian family fashion big-business, where everybody from granny
to tot has major couture kung-fu.  Suddenly they've lost their top guy
and his core entourage in one catastrophe.  I pity them.  There's a lot
of winter daylight in the Missoni clan right now.
  
## 155 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 13 08:06

    
This may be my last rant of the 2013 SOTW season here; it's been over
a week and I'm knee-deep in Balkan snow.


Sometimes people ask me what a "Stack" is, and why they're different
from the Internet, or even from yesterday's Web 2.0.  

People assume that Stacks want to break the Internet into Balkanized
pieces, but that's not what's going on.  Basically, "Stacks" want to
corral the Internet's anonymous "users" --"nobody knew they were dogs"
-- and turn users into tagged, branded and privatized livestock.  

A Stack doesn't have to "break the Internet" to do this; it just has
to set up the digital equivalent of a comprehensive family farm, so
that the free-range cowboys of the Electronic Frontier are left with
crickets chirping and nothing much to do.  A modern Stack will leverage
stuff that has never been "Internet," such as mobile devices, cell
coverage and operating systems.

In order to become a "Stack," or one of the "Big Five" -- Amazon
Facebook Google Apple Microsoft -- you need an "ecosystem," or rather a
factory farm of comprehensive services that surround the "user" with
fences he doesn't see.  Basically, you corral Stack livestock by luring
them with free services, then watching them in ways they can't become
aware of, and won't object to.  So you can't just baldly sell them a
commodity service in a box; you have to inveigle them into an organized
Stack that features most, if not all, of the following:

An operating system, a dedicated way to sell cultural material (music,
movies, books, apps), tools for productivity, an advertising business,
some popular post-Internet device that isn't an old-school desktop
computer (tablets, phones, phablets, Surfaces, whatever's next), a
search engine, a dedicated social network, a "payment solution" or
private bank, and maybe a Cloud, a private high-speed backbone, or a
voice-activated AI service if you are looking ahead.  Stack cars, Stack
goggles, Stack private rocketships optional.

http://battellemedia.com/archives/2012/01/the-internet-big-five-by-product-strength.php

It's been argued that the key development for a Stack is a bank; not
the old finance-crisis broken  2008-style bank, but some bright new
shiny Bitcoiny kind of internal company app-store with a more-or-less
private currency system.  The financiers are the only enemies that the
Stacks really fear; they're certainly not much scared by their major
industrial rivals the health-care biz, the oil biz and the
military-entertainment complex, though they probably ought to be.  

Still, the Stacks figure they can disrupt and disintermediate all
those old-school businesses; it's the stock-markets that scare them,
because they all know that, if they're destroyed, it will surely be
through that method; moguls can destroy the Stacks just like they
destroyed the world of the 90s dot-com boom.

Are the Stacks "stable?"  In a word, No.  They're all dizzyingly
unstable Napoleonic gimcrack empires built by eccentric geek weirdos.  
Besides which, they've all learned to hate each other, and they've
been stocking up patents for an almighty legal war for years now.

Will there be other "Stacks" created in other countries than the USA? 
Maybe.  Samsung might become a Stack.  They're feasting on the bones
of Nokia, Sharp, Panasonic and Sony now, but they might raise their
leonine heads from the blood feast. 

http://techcrunch.com/2013/01/05/the-fifth-horsemen-of-tech-samsung/

Whatever is behind the Chinese Great Firewall might congeal into a Red
Chinese Stack some day; a "Stack with Chinese Characteristics."

Who will be the first Stack to collapse?  Facebook would be the
obvious guess because it's the newest, goofiest and weakest, but Tomi
Ahonen, the guy who predicted the death of Nokia, says here that it
will probably be Microsoft.  Why?  Because Google will build an Android
banking system.  Google has already won, Ahonen says here.  Maybe.

http://communities-dominate.blogs.com/brands/2012/12/android-won-windows-lost-now-what-the-battle-of-the-century-is-decided-microsoft-relegated-to-ever-s.html


Lastly -- is there a "Stack" that isn't a corporation?  Could you have
an Internet Stack?  Maybe -- if you had a comprehensive Open Source
Movement, a kind of Maker Movement for making everything.  

But -- where would they get the revenue stream?  Every Stack has
already chosen a business model -- they all charge plenty for doing
*something* -- and then they use that crowbar to destroy the commercial
worth of the services and devices offered by all the other Stacks. 
That's "disruption."   Could Open Source "disrupt" all of that?  It's a
bit like asking if the Comanches of the Electronic Frontier could
build a superior railroad -- or maybe it's like asking if Comanches
could run a railroad once all the Rail Barons killed each other. 

Who knows, maybe they could.  There's always a wild card -- like the
chance that the Qataris might think it was a good idea.  "The Al
Jazeera Stack."  
  
## 156 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Mon 7 Jan 13 09:15

    
It's interesting that nobody's mentioned Kurzweil joining Google yet.  Maybe
everybody's taking a wait-and-see attitude, but it seems like someone who
digs the idea of taking the DNA of their father, cloning it and then
populating the newly reconstructed fatherbody with the memories he has of
his father... you couple that with Google's stack and that seems like a
recipe for awesomely high weirdness.

I had some thoughts about it on a long drive back from Santa Fe the other
night.  I'm not sure if this is just sci-fi daydreaming or if I'm actually
on to something.

<http://www.jeffkramer.com/2013/01/07/kurzweil-bot-ai-and-the-googleboard/>
  
## 157 of 186: Chris Marti (cmarti) Mon 7 Jan 13 14:39

    
Kurzweil is such an incongruous combination of genius and apparent
crackpot. JMHO, of course.
  
## 158 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 13 00:42

    
I'm glad to see Kurzweil kept busy.  The Singularity doesn't exist;
one less thing to worry about.

O'Reilly guys live in an alpha-geek world where the Stacks are
irrelevant and it's all about Web 2.0 blithely transforming itself into
Web Squared.

http://radar.oreilly.com/2012/12/14-trends-for-2013.html
  
## 159 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 13 01:28

    
There we go! (he said triumphantly)

http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/an-interview-with-isaac-mao-on-the-concretisation-of-sharism-in-china/2010/11/04

If "Shareism" exists, then there must be "Sharists."  Or, for the
hipper among us, "sharistas."
  
## 160 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 8 Jan 13 05:44

    
Not surprisingly, Joi Ito has something to do with this. Check the
location of the original sharist manifesto by Isaac Mao:
http://freesouls.cc/essays/07-isaac-mao-sharism.html

The Internet culture of "open" and "free" started giving way to
subscriptions, pay walls, and other fee strategies with the economy on
the ropes (if not down for the count)? Maybe it's just taken time to
nudge people away from the notion that content should be free and
shareable. Creative Commons offered an alternative, and sharism is an
extension of that thinking. 

Isaac Mao argues that sharing is inherent: 

"Sharism is encoded in the Human Genome. Although eclipsed by the many
pragmatisms of daily life, the theory of Sharism finds basis in
neuroscience and its study of the working model of the human brain.
Although we can't entirely say how the brain works as a whole, we do
have a model of the functional mechanism of the nervous system and its
neurons. A neuron is not a simple organic cell, but a very powerful,
electrically excitable biological processor. Groups of neurons form
vastly interconnected networks, which, by changing the strength of the
synapses between cells, can process information, and learn. A neuron,
by sharing chemical signals with its neighbors, can be integrated into
more meaningful patterns that keep the neuron active and alive.
Moreover, such a simple logic can be iterated and amplified, since all
neurons work on a similar principle of connecting and sharing.
Originally, the brain is quite open. A neural network exists to share
activity and information, and I believe this model of the brain should
inspire ideas and decisions about human networks.

"Thus, our brain supports sharing in its very system-nature. This has
profound implications for the creative process. Whenever you have an
intention to create, you will find it easier to generate more creative
ideas if you keep the sharing process firmly in mind. The
idea-forming-process is not linear, but more like an avalanche of
amplifications along the thinking path. It moves with the momentum of a
creative snowball. If your internal cognitive system encourages
sharing, you can engineer a feedback loop of happiness, which will help
you generate even more ideas in return. It's a kind of butterfly-
effect, as the small creative energy you spend will eventually return
to make you, and the world, more creative.

"However, daily decisions for most adults are quite low in creative
productivity, if only because they've switched off their sharing
paths...."
  
## 161 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 13 07:40

    
I wonder why so many of the world's oldest "companies" are Japanese. 
Is it something in the water maybe? Japan has earthquakes,
fires,typhoons, tsunamis, civil wars, atomic bombs; they're not what
you'd call a peaceful and somnolent area.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_oldest_companies
  
## 162 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Tue 8 Jan 13 08:55

    
I was thinking about that the other day, how wealth commonly only lasts 3
generations or something.  We're societally tuned in the west to do what you
want with your life, so unless your ancestors started a public corporation,
at each generation there's a good chance the kids are going to decide to go
do something else.  (My dad left the farm to join the Navy and be a
missionary, now someone else owns the farm.)  In Japan there's probably more
of a societal pressure to maintain the legacy and do good by your ancestors.
  
## 163 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 13 09:27

    
Wanna read what the rich guys pretend to read?  The World Economic
Forum's Global Risks Report 2013.

http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GlobalRisks_Report_2013.pdf
  
## 164 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 8 Jan 13 09:42

    
Note the page on "digital wildfires in a hyperconnected world."
  
## 165 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Tue 8 Jan 13 09:59

    
As a corollary from the long-lasting Japanese corporations, I've been
wondering lately about how weirdness passes through generations.  I know a
fair number of out of the box, non-traditional thinkers and doers.  Now that
I have a proto-human wandering around to be molded, I've noticed that a lot
of the kids of weird and crazy people tend to end up being really, really
normal.  Like, 2.3 kids, a 401k and a gym membership normal.  Is this just
one of those things where most people in the general population tend towards
the mean, regardless of whether their parents were on the edges of the
curve?  Do we really have any control or influence over our kids?  Do you
need a normal upbringing to become weird later in life?
  
## 166 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 8 Jan 13 14:04

    
I've had two kids, a 401K, and a gym membership, and I'm weird as
hell. If you dig in, you find weirdness in everyone - and you also find
stability in people who might appear whacky.

When I look at the way I've evolved, it has as much to do with
literature and media as with my parents' influence. I can see both
parents reflected in my fundamental behaviors, but I'm also a product
of James Joyce, Thomas Pynchon, Richard Farina, Howard Hawks, Gene
Roddenberry, Bob Dylan, Arthur Lee, Shunryu Suzuki, Dogen, Gurdjieff
... I could go on at length, but you get the idea. Some weirdness is
rebellion and reaction, jettisoned at some point, but some of it falls
into your comfort zone. 
  
## 167 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Tue 8 Jan 13 17:12

    
That Global Risks report is awesome.  It's really interesting to see the top
risks by likelihood change over time.

2007: Breakdown of critical information infrastructure
2008-2010: Asset price collapse
2011: Meterological catastrophes
2012-2013: Severe income disparity
  
## 168 of 186: Roland Legrand (roland) Wed 9 Jan 13 01:24

    
thank you for the pointer to the Risks report, <bruces>. I'll have to
find time to read it carefully - if I can get myself to put aside your
awewome book Love is Strange. All those interested in futurism and the
island of Capri should read that book. Also, glad to 'meet' Zeta
Starlitz again.  
  
## 169 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 9 Jan 13 02:17

    
Indian women still plenty ticked off.

http://blogs.reuters.com/india/2013/01/09/short-skirts-bad-stars-and-chow-mein-why-indias-women-get-raped/

A "War on Rape" isn't gonna work any better than a "War on Terror,"
but if they can organize politically and get a few crocodiles voted out
of office, that might at least clear the air some.

In similar news, Americans still indignant about gun crimes, while the
NRA is rolling in gun-biz cash and taking in new members by the
thousands.
  
## 170 of 186: Rob Myers (robmyers) Wed 9 Jan 13 04:24

    
Are we really cyborgs just because we have our iPhones on vibrate?

It's not the same as seeing Stelarc wired up to the net.
  
## 171 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 9 Jan 13 05:23

    
I don't think anybody's argued that we're cyborgs "just because we
have our iPhones on vibrate."  

"Humans are surrounded by built objects and networks. So profoundly
are humans altering their biological and physical landscapes that some
have openly suggested that the proper object of anthropological study
should be cyborgs rather than humans, for, as Donna Haraway says, 'we
are all cyborgs now.'

"Cyborg Anthropology takes the view that most of modern human life is
a product of both human and non-human objects.

"How we interact with machines and technology in many ways defines who
we are. Cyborg Anthropology is a framework for understanding the
effects of objects and technology on humans and culture."

http://cyborganthropology.com/Main_Page

This is interesting, too, in Wired:
http://www.wired.com/opinion/2013/01/hawking-machine-man-robots/

Hélène Mialet argues that Hawking is (as Obi-Wan Kenobi said of Darth
Vader) "more machine now than man." As such he's also more than one
mind, but the hub of a collective network: "What I discovered was that
to understand Hawking, you had to understand the people and the
machines without whom he would be unable to act and think; you had to
understand the ways in which these entities augmented and amplified
Hawking’s competencies. For example: The specialties of his students,
which are spread across very different research fields, enable him to
integrate diverse information and the different facets of a problem in
a way that others cannot. His secretary provides him with a mental
assistant many of us would never have, by sorting and arranging his
data according to his interests and what he is able to process."

Hawking is an extreme, but many of us are extended and enhanced by our
machines, and also by our extend ability to form and leverage human
and information networks. It's not that you can set your cellphone to
vibrate, but that you can use it to leverage an augmented and enhanced
experience... "augmented reality" is a term that is often applied more
narrowly to a particular kind of overlay technology, but I realized in
the FringeWare days, and again in conversations with Amber Case and
Tyger AC (et al), that the term has broader application and is
connected with the concept of the human as "cyborg" or cybernetic
organism, a human with communication and control capabilities extended
by technology.

Maybe it's more about having our minds on vibrate. 
  
## 172 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 9 Jan 13 07:27

    
Just started a Tumblr today.  Hope it doesn't cause info overload, eat
my cyborganic anthrobrain, trigger a Singularity, fatally distract
mankind from other, far more important issues, etc.

http://brucesterling.tumblr.com/

In other thrilling news, it's still snowing outside.  I never thought
that a Texan lad like myself would say this about the beautiful winter
snowscapes of the higher latitudes, but it's getting a tad monotonous.
About time to wrap up, pack, and hit the road.
  
## 173 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 9 Jan 13 07:29

    
If you think imminent eschatological apocalypse is on the menu this
season, you might wanna toss these Cambridge guys a few dollars,
pounds, I dunno, whatever they're taking this season.  "Please fund our
Kickstarter before humankind ceases to exist."

http://cser.org/index.html
  
## 174 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Wed 9 Jan 13 08:21

    
Speaking of bots, and William Gibson's early work...

<http://www.engadget.com/2013/01/09/nuances-project-wintermute/>
  
## 175 of 186: (Jeff Kramer) O o . o O (jeffk) Wed 9 Jan 13 11:56

    
And a bit more from thenextweb.com:

<http://thenextweb.com/mobile/2013/01/09/nuances-project-wintermute-a-virtual-cloud-assistant-that-follows-you-across-ecosystem-boundaries/>
  
## 176 of 186: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 9 Jan 13 16:41

    
Better than the Borg: The Neurotech Era
@ramez naam -- Fortune Magazine

(http://www.forbes.com/sites/singularity/2013/01/09/better-than-the-borg-the-neurotech-era/)
  
## 177 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 10 Jan 13 00:31

    
American risks to life in 2013; off to perish of their cars and guns,
as usual.

http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324442304578231652153488158.html


Interestingly, the article in the Wall Street Journal doesn't mention
that they perish of the ideology promulgated in the Wall Street
Journal.  In the Balkans an article like this would have been served on
a platter by the booze and cigarettes industries.
  
## 178 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 10 Jan 13 01:15

    
Meanwhile, the American Right struggles valiantly as all hope fades,
darkness closes in, and popular discourse suffocates in a miasma of
left-inflicted fear and intimidation.


Sarah Palin · 3,485,813 like this
Wednesday, January 9 at 11:23pm (10 hours ago) 
 
"Ben Shapiro has a great new book out called “Bullies: How The Left’s
Culture of Fear and Intimidation Silences America.” Ben’s premise about
the left’s silencing tactics is absolutely correct. 

"Obviously I’ve witnessed the left’s bullying behavior up close and
personal when it’s been directed at those so close to me. And, of
course, I’ve seen how nasty it can be for other conservatives as well.
You know, there’s something especially ugly about the way the left goes
after children of conservatives. I still find it highly ironic that
the supposedly “tolerant” left has done nothing but bully, demonize,
and judge my daughter Bristol for making the right decision to keep her
baby and work so very hard as a single mom to care and provide for
him. I don’t know of any conservative “war on women,” but I sure have
seen the left’s war on conservative women!

"Please read Ben’s book and consider his advice about how we must
stand up and push back twice as hard against this bullying. We must not
allow ourselves to be frightened into silence. Yes, it’s hard to “keep
on keeping on” when being pushed around – but like Ronald Reagan said:
when we stiffen our spines, those around us can stiffen theirs, too!
Press in, press on. Don’t retreat, friends!"

- Sarah Palin
  
## 179 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 10 Jan 13 06:02

    
That's amusing. At least "the left" stopped short of waterboarding.
But I'm sure the Koch Brothers and Rupert Murdoch are quivering in fear
of the left-wing bullies, while Fox News and Breitbart, pillars of
civility, promote honest, civil, fair & balanced debate vs the left's
culture of fear and intimidation.

That right-wing propaganda machine never ceases to amaze me.

Meanwhile, we apparently dodged another space-bullet, for now:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsround/20969893

And microscopic "bullies" have created a public health emergency in
Boston:
http://abcnews.go.com/Health/hospitals-flooded-flu-patients-turn-chicago/story?id=18167245

Our state of the world conversation ends today; I'm finding it hard to
draw conclusions and make predictions with any kind of confidence. But
here's what I'm thinking...

In the USA, right-wing extremists of the Breitbart/Palin/Tea Party
variety will lose steam as average Americans find their way back to
moderation, and legislators are forced to face the realities of
governance, abandoning libertarian small-government (or no-government)
fantasies. The most extreme - those guys who're piling up guns and
dreaming of a violent revolution, may actually take arms and start
shooting, but that will only feed the growing backlash against gun
violence. 

The global economy will lurch and moan but it won't collapse. Climate
change will bring innovative adaptation and open new markets. We'll be
slammed by an increasing number of epic landscape-altering storms, but
we'll brew mitigation strategies that will be more or less effective. 

We'll take Paul Ehrlich seriously again, and wonder what to do about
the "population bomb." http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Population_Bomb
Wars and climate catastrophes, and possibly space rocks and pandemics,
might "help."

The market for e-books will diminish; we'll keep printing and turning
pages, though e-books will persist as an alternative. People will spend
less time with social media in cyberspace, and more time hanging out
in physpace. Facebook will fail to thrive but, like AOL or MySpace, it
won't die.

Someone somewhere, maybe a terrorist or maybe a state, will trigger a
nuclear explosion or two. This will have a sobering effect and put the
nuclear option away once and for all (best case), or trigger an all-out
global nuclear war (worst case).

Whatever the case, Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky will be back here
for the 2014 State of the World conversation.
  
## 180 of 186: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 10 Jan 13 07:29

    
Thanks, Jon!   I had just composed this post when yours slipped in
ahead.  I guess I'll put it up anyway...

---
Bruce, I'm catching up a bit, and I found myself pondering some at
your statement back a bit that a war on rape was as pointless as a war
on terror.  Now we see Palin wrapping put-down quotes around the lefty
term "war on women."

I haven't thought about this use of language, but "war on x" seems to
be spreading.  It is almost ridiculously inflated terminology. 
"Campaign" already has a military resolve about it, but "war" makes the
analogy almost ridiculous.

War used to be an extreme somewhat organized horror, mixed up with
dread, determination to survive, the best and worst expressions of
patriotism and mob identity, sanctioned murder, looting and vandalism
on the largest scale the technologies of the day could accomplish, and
all kinds of not-quite sanctioned but expected side activities that
regular society would disdain. For centuries a war was always against
people -- some group of people who held a territory or shared a
culture, seems like. Far away wars, like the crusades, could be
especially applauded by those who stayed home or lived later. 
(Depending on what side your family had been on, and whether revenge
still has to be enacted to finish the story of the crusades in a
satisfactory way.)  

Using the war analogy implies something is must-win, by any means
possible.   Maybe LBJ is to blame for a war on poverty that was a noble
vision, but didn't manage to engage the do-or-die resolve of those on
the other side of a blurry cultural divide. (And didn't divert him from
his literal, killing war across the Pacific.)  Right away, critics of
any particular facet of federal policy could say it felt like war on
the poor.  War on poverty was a crazy abstraction, and the joke about
waging war on poverty by personally getting rich was obvious, too. 

Moving into the world where geopolitical power plays can be made with
drone and intelligence forces hits, war itself is seeming less like
war.  Perhaps it's tempting to have a war on some abstraction since war
itself is morphing so strangely, into something where the battlefield
itself is no longer a stretch of open land?  

But there's Palin, disdaining the hyperbole of "war on women," when
she was making political hay last month with accusations of "war on
Christmas."  (At least women are a group of people, which makes the
metaphor disturbingly coherent, though still dreadfully overblown.)

And somehow, cultural changes happen.  Women have more legislated
rights and general consensus privileges now compared to a century ago
nearly everywhere on the planet.  At least in the US, rape is less
accepted now than a century ago, when it was a capital crime, but the
'virtue' and social standing of the victim was such an important
element that the idea of spousal rape or the rape of a prostitute would
have seemed nonsensical to nearly everybody, as well as not having any
legal definitions.

Back to the link about the outrage about blaming victims for being
raped in India.  I think that "culture war" (another stupid military
metaphor) can have an effect if it is conducted via ridicule as well as
sincere calls for justice.  Changes in what is civil do seem to go
through a time where a lot of people don't agree, but they have learned
to shut up because it is not cool to have their attitude any more.

Maybe we are losing the power of the word "war," but we will still see
shifts in cultures.  Perhaps Indian women can succeed in ridiculing
and demonizing those who excuse rapists.  If they can, I expect there
will be fewer rapes happening, though perhaps a higher percentage of
them reported.  "War on Christmas" presumably gets some Christians all
riled up and motivated to express their religious conviction as part of
the annual consumer excess festivals, when they might otherwise keep
the religious aspects private. I'm horrified by the damage of the "war
on terror," which not only kills people and motivates revenge, but
builds a surveillance society by playing on feelings of terror rather
than eliminating it.  Is it doomed to fail?  While it certainly can't
completely succeed in doing what the name says, it seems to be
accomplishing a lot of what it is actually intended to do,
unfortunately.  

Palin's "don't retreat" plays on that image of a noble war, maybe a
holy war.  I find her language as silly as her values, but I still am
amazed at how war is such a romantic concept to so many people.  I am
from a generation who watched ghastly images on TV every night and
marched in the streets to put an end to it, so perhaps I can't really
understand the terminology as she uses it, even if the resolve is
obvious.

When I do embrace battle metaphors, then I'm still advocating one of
the "tactics" from your book _Zietgeist_ which is pop culture for hope.
 (More authentic pop culture for more authentic hope, perhaps. Not all
rock n roll is created equal or intelligently.) I do sometimes forget
that hope and justice also look different from where Palin, as well as
the Taliban, sit. 

This annual state of the world stint always makes me think and
rethink, in all kinds of directions I don't expect.  

Thanks, Bruce and Jon.
  
## 181 of 186: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 10 Jan 13 07:36

    
(And I meant to say that the "war on terror" seems to be accomplishing
a lot of what it is actually intended to do, BOTH fortunately in terms
of purportedly saving many lives, and unfortunately in terms of civil
liberties and freedom.)

   
  
## 182 of 186: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 10 Jan 13 09:57

    
That 3DPrinting biz?  It's exciting for 2013, but they'll all be broke
soon enough.

http://voxelfab.com/blog/2013/01/theres-no-money-in-3d-printing/

*In other similar news, some day we'll all run out of stuff to talk
about.
  
## 183 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 10 Jan 13 11:21

    
<gail>, your post makes me think about the perception of (or,
trendier, optics for) war post WWII, sanitized by the many postwar
films and accounts. Those who knew better kept quiet. Meanwhile those
of us who grew up in the 50s were deluded; we played war games, it was
fun. Vietnam taught us better, or I should say, taught us bitter.
Bitter disillusionment.

Drone war reduces risk but, arguably, increases the probability of
collateral damage. In fact, in war all damage could be characterized as
collateral damage, as powerful elders, safely away from the front,
send the young and innocent, true believers, into battle.

Hopefully by now many more of us, a majority, understand that war is a
nightmare to be avoided. And the war metaphor doesn't serve us all
that well.

We won't end rape by declaring war on it. We'll end rape through
education, cultivation of sensitivity and empathy, rethinking the
meaning of gender difference. 

We won't end poverty by declaring war on it, or by throwing money at
it. We'll end poverty by caring about it.

We won't end drug problems by declaring war on drugs. We'll end drug
problems by understanding why and how drugs become a problem, by
treating addiction as a very human issue, maybe a disease, not a crime.
  
## 184 of 186: Jamais Cascio (jamaiscascio) Thu 10 Jan 13 12:30

    
[Sorry to disappear like that; a switch in arthritis medication seems
to have triggered the onset of the worst arthritis attack I've had in
several years. I've spent most of the last week sleeping. Finally seem
to be coming out of it, but still can't walk.]

The topics covered in the WEF report offer a stark contrast to what
rich guys seem to want to talk about the global economy, at least when
they think nobody's watching. I attended the Astana Economic Forum last
year, a week-long event organized by the Kazakhstan government as a
way to showcase just how eager they are to get in the global game. I
was invited to talk about sustainability, pretty much the last thing
that anyone wanted to hear about. That my only real ally on my panel
was *Bjorn Lomborg* should show you just how skewed the event was.

The final day of the conference featured a roundtable discussion that
I found stunning. Here's what I wrote afterwards:

> The most notable part of the event was the roundtable discussion on
the final night, bringing together political leaders (current and
former Prime Ministers and Presidents), a half-dozen Nobel Prize
laureates in economics, a couple of executives and a couple of media
figures to talk about the world's economic situation. [...]

> ...a single telling example: in the 90 minutes of the discussion,
unemployment was mentioned once (about 45 minutes in), and briefly,
while inequality or similar concepts never came up. What received the
most attention was the need for even more austerity (and how to handle
the annoying groups of citizens who don't like it), alongside casual
discussions of tossing Greece out of the EU.

> Here's the problem: AEF is a prime example of how the global
conversation about development and economics takes place without much
regard for anything beyond the interests of the most wealthy and
powerful. This is hardly a surprise; what was surprising was the utter
lack of subtlety about it. Nobody bats an eye at the obsequiousness of
Nobel laureates and global media executives towards the
President-for-Life of an up-and-coming petrokleptocracy. Jokes are made
about how democracy is ruined by having to rely on voters. The fate of
the planet gets decided over bad (and infrequent) coffee and
semi-functional translation.<

Somebody captured my live-tweets of the roundtable: 
http://turnstylenews.com/2012/05/24/bleak-tomorrow-futurist-jamais-cascio-on-the-astana-economic-forum/

I wasn't so much shocked by how venal and short-sighted these world
rulers were as I was by how unembarrassed and blatant they were about
it. There was no attempt to mask their positions with high-minded
language.
  
## 185 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 10 Jan 13 13:39

    
Thanks for pointing out yet another sign of the apocalypse (YASOTA),
Jamais...
  
## 186 of 186: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 10 Jan 13 14:18

    
This is a wrap, thanks to all who showed up with comments, questions,
bodily states, mental states, prognostications, rants, etc. Thanks
especially to Bruce Sterling for digging out of the Serbian snow to
join us for a couple of weeks. 

Onward! Through the fog!
  

